Ahura Mazda (/@,hUr@,maezd@/;) (also known as Ohrmazd, Ahuramazda, Hourmazd, Hormazd, and Hurmuz, Lord or simply as spirit) is the Avestan name for the higher, uncreated spirit of Zoroaster, the founder of Zoroastrianism, the old Iranian religion predating Islam. Ahura Mazda is described as the highest spirit of worship in Zoroastrianism, along with being the first and most frequently invoked spirit in the Yasna. The literal meaning of the word Ahura is light and Mazda is wisdom. Zoroastrianism revolves around three basic tenets - Good Thoughts, Good Words and Good Deeds.
Ahura Mazda first appeared in the Achaemenid period (c. 550 - 330 BCE) under Darius I's Behistun Inscription. Until Artaxerxes II (405-04 to 359-58 BCE), Ahura Mazda was worshiped and invoked alone. With Artaxerxes II, Ahura Mazda was invoked in a triad, with Mithra and Apam Napat. In the Achaemenid period, there are no representations of Ahura Mazda other than the custom for every emperor to have an empty chariot drawn by white horses, to invite Ahura Mazda to accompany the Persian army on battles. Images of Ahura Mazda began in the Parthian period, but were stopped and replaced with stone carved figures in the Sassanid period.


== Nomenclature ==
"Mazda", or rather the Avestan stem-form Mazda-, nominative Mazda, reflects Proto-Iranian *Mazdah (female). It is generally taken to be the proper name of the spirit, and like its Sanskrit cognate medha, means "intelligence" or "wisdom". Both the Avestan and Sanskrit words reflect Proto-Indo-Iranian *mazdha-, from Proto-Indo-European *mnsdkeh1, literally meaning "placing (*dkeh1) one's mind (*mn-s)", hence "wise".
The name was rendered as Ahuramazda (Old Persian) during the Achaemenid era, Hormazd during the Parthian era, and Ohrmazd was used during the Sassanian era.
The name may be attested on cuneiform tablets of Assyrian Assurbanipal, in the form Assara Mazas, though this interpretation is very controversial. 


== Characteristics ==
Even though Ahura Mazda was a spirit in the Old Iranian religion, he had not yet been given the title of "uncreated spirit". This title was given by Zoroaster, who proclaimed Ahura Mazda as the uncreated spirit, wholly wise, benevolent and good, as well as the creator and upholder of Asha ("truth"). As Ahura Mazda is described as the creator and upholder of Asha, he is a supporter and guardian of justice, and the friend of the just man.


== Zoroaster's revelation ==
At the age of 30, Zoroaster received a revelation. While Zoroaster was fetching water from dawn for a sacred ritual, he saw the shining figure of the yazata, Vohu Manah, who led Zoroaster to the presence of Ahura Mazda, where he was taught the cardinal principles of the Good Religion. As a result of this vision, Zoroaster felt that he was chosen to spread and preach the religion. He stated that this source of all goodness was the only Ahura worthy of the highest worship. He further stated that Ahura Mazda created spirits known as yazatas to aid him, who also merited devotion. Zoroaster proclaimed that all of the Iranian daevas were bad spirits and deserved no worship. These "bad" spirits were created by Angra Mainyu, the hostile and evil spirit. The existence of Angra Mainyu was the source of all sin and misery in the universe. Zoroaster claimed that Ahura Mazda was not an omnipotent God, but used the aid of humans in the cosmic struggle against Angra Mainyu. Nonetheless, Ahura Mazda is Angra Mainyu's superior, not his equal. Angra Mainyu and his daevas (spirits) which attempt to afflict humans away from the path of righteousness (asha) would eventually be destroyed.


== History ==


=== Achaemenid Empire ===

Whether the Achaemenids were Zoroastrians is a matter of much debate. However, it is known that the Achaemenids were worshipers of Ahura Mazda. The representation and invocation of Ahura Mazda can be seen on royal inscriptions written by Achaemenid kings. The most notable of all the inscriptions is the Behistun Inscription written by Darius I which contain many references to Ahura Mazda. An inscription written in Greek was found in a late Achaemenid temple at Persepolis which invoked Ahura Mazda and two other spirits, most likely Mithra and Anahita. On the Elamite Persepolis Fortification Tablet 377, Ahura Mazda is invoked along with Mithra and Voruna (Apam Napat, probably vedic Varuna, "water-god"). Artaxerxes III makes this invocation to the three spirits again in his reign.
The early Achaemind period contained no representation of Ahura Mazda. The winged symbol with a male figure who was formerly regarded by European scholars as Ahura Mazda has been shown to represent the royal xvar@nah, the personification of royal power and glory. However, it was customary for every emperor from Cyrus until Darius III to have an empty chariot drawn by white horses as a place for Ahura Mazda to accompany the Persian army on battles. The use of images of Ahura Mazda began in the western satraps of the Achaemenid Empire in the late 5th century BCE. Under Artaxerxes II, the first literary reference as well as a statue of Ahura Mazda was built by a Persian governor of Lydia in 365 BCE.


=== Parthian Empire ===
It is known that the reverence for Ahura Mazda, as well as Anahita and Mithra continued with the same traditions during this period. The worship of Ahura Mazda with images is noticed, but it stopped with the beginning of the Sassanid period. Zoroastrian iconoclasm, which can be traced to the end of the Parthian period and the beginning of the Sassanid, eventually put an end to the use of all images of Ahura Mazda in worship. However, Ahura Mazda remained a dignified male figure, standing or on horseback which is found in Sassanian investiture.


=== Sassanid Empire ===

During the Sassanid Empire, a heretical form of Zoroastrianism, termed Zurvanism, emerged. It gained adherents throughout the Sassanid Empire, most notably the royal lineage of Sassanian emperors. Under the reign of Shapur I, Zurvanism spread and became a widespread cult. Zurvanism revokes Zoroaster's original message of Ahura Mazda as the uncreated spirit, and the "uncreated creator" of all, and reduces him to a created spirit, one of two twin sons of Zurvan, their father and the primary spirit. Zurvanism also makes Ahura Mazda and Angra Mainyu of equal strength and only contrasting spirits.
Other than Zurvanism, the Sassanian kings demonstrated their devotion to Ahura Mazda in other fashions. Five kings took the name Hormizd and Bahram II created the title of "Ohrmazd-mowbad" which was continued after the fall of the Sassanid Empire and through the Islamic times. All devotional acts in Zoroastrianism originating from the Sassanian period begin with homage to Ahura Mazda. The five Gahs begin with the declaration in Middle Persian, that "Ohrmazd is Lord" and incorporate the Gathic verse "Whom, Mazda hast thou appointed my protector". Zoroastrian prayers are to be said in the presence of light, either in the form of fire or the sun. In the Iranian dialects of Yidga and Munji, the sun is still called "ormozd".


=== Present-day Zoroastrianism ===
In 1884, Martin Haug proposed a new interpretation of Yasna 30.3 that subsequently influenced Zoroastrian doctrine to a significant extent. According to Haug's interpretation, the "twin spirits" of 30.3 were Angra Mainyu and Spenta Mainyu, the former being literally the "Destructive Spirit" and the latter being the 'Bounteous Spirit' (of Mazda). Further, in Haug's scheme Angra Mainyu was now not Ahura Mazda's binary opposite, but--like Spenta Mainyu--an emanation of Him. Haug also interpreted the concept of a free will of Yasna 45.9 as an accommodation to explain where Angra Mainyu came from since Ahura Mazda created only good. The free will made it possible for Angra Mainyu to choose to be evil. Although these latter conclusions were not substantiated by Zoroastrian tradition, at the time Haug's interpretation was gratefully accepted by the Parsis of Bombay since it provided a defense against Christian missionary rhetoric, particularly the attacks on the Zoroastrian idea of an uncreated Evil that was as uncreated as God was. Following Haug, the Bombay Parsis began to defend themselves in the English language press; the argument being that Angra Mainyu was not Mazda's binary opposite, but his subordinate, who--as in Zurvanism also--chose to be evil. Consequently, Haug's theories were disseminated as a Parsi interpretation, also in the West, where they appeared to be corroborating Haug. Reinforcing themselves, Haug's ideas came to be iterated so often that they are today almost universally accepted as doctrine.


== In other religions ==
In Manichaeism, the name Ohrmazd Bay ("god Ahura Mazda") was used for the primal figure Nasa Qadmaya, the "original man" and emanation of the Father of Greatness (in Manicheism called Zurvan) through whom after he sacrificed himself to defend the world of light was consumed by the forces of darkness. Although Ormuzd is freed from the world of darkness his "sons", often called his garments or weapons, remain. His sons, later known as the World Soul after a series of events will for the most part escape from matter and return again to the world of light where they came from. Manicheans often identified many of Mani's cosmological figures with Zoroastrian ones. This may be in part because Mani was born in the greatly Zoroastrian Parthian Empire.
In Sogdian Buddhism, Xwrmzt' (Sogdian was written without a consistent representation of vowels) was the name used in place of Ahura Mazda. Via contacts with Turkic peoples like the Uyghurs, this Sogdian name came to the Mongols, who still name this deity Qormusta Tengri (Also Qormusta or Qormusda) is now a popular enough deity to appear in many contexts that are not explicitly Buddhist.
The pre-Christian Armenians had Aramazd as an important deity in their pantheon of gods. He is thought to be a syncretic deity, a combination of the autochthonous Urartian figure Ara and the Iranian Ahura Mazda. In modern-day Armenia, Aramazd is a male first name.
Some scholars (Kuiper. IIJ I, 1957; Zimmer. Munchner Studien 1984:187-215) believe that Ahura Mazda originates from *vouruna-mitra, or Vedic demigod Varuna.


== 101 Names ==


== In popular culture ==
Ormazd and Ahriman feature in the 2008 video game, Prince of Persia.
Ormazd and Ahriman feature heavily in the Philip K. Dick novel The Cosmic Puppets.
In the 2001 video game Severance: Blade of Darkness, Ahura Mazda was the god who created the entire world in which the game takes place.
One of the inspirations for the name of the Mazda Motor Corporation is Ahura Mazda, with homophone similarity to founder Jujiro Matsuda.
A statue of Ahura Mazda is built to contain the Djinn in the film Wishmaster.
In the 2013 Amish Tripathi novel The Oath of the Vayuputras, Ahura Mazda is shown as the God of Pariha.
Ahura Mazda is referred in the Immortal Technique song "Sign of the Times" from the Martyr disc.
In the novel Battle Royale, a student named Mizuho Inada believes she is a warrior for the god Ahura Mazda.
Ahura Mazda appears as a character in the Lucifer's Halo miniseries of Joseph Michael Linsner's comic Dawn.
Ahora Mazda was the name of a late 1960s, early 1970s psychedelic and fusion prog-rock band from the Netherlands.
Ahura Mazda is featured in the book Kushiel's Avatar, the third novel in Jacqueline Carey's Kushiel's Legacy series.
Ahura Mazda is mentioned in song 'Sign of the Times' in 'Immortal Technique's' album The_Martyr_ (2011)


== See also ==

Varuna
Vritra (VritrAsura, also known as Ahi or snake. Enemy of devata Indra, and defeated by him)


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Bibliography ==


== Further reading ==
http://www.google.com/search?client=safari&rls=en&q=PERSIA+%26+THE+CREATION+OF+JUDAISM&ie=UTF-8&oe=UTF-8#q=PERSIA+and+THE+CREATION+OF+JUDAISM&rls=en&spell=1
Ahuramazda and Zoroastrianism
Dhalla, Maneckji Nusservanji (1938), History of Zoroastrianism, New York: OUP, ISBN 0-404-12806-8 
Boyce, Mary (2001), "Mithra the King and Varuna the Master", Festschrift fur Helmut Humbach zum 80., Trier: WWT, pp. 239-257 
Humbach, Helmut (1991), The Gathas of Zarathushtra and the other Old Avestan texts, Heidelberg: Winter, ISBN 3-533-04473-4 
Kent, Roland G. (1945), "Old Persian Texts", Journal of Near Eastern Studies 4 (4): 228-233, doi:10.1086/370756 
Kuiper, Bernardus Franciscus Jacobus (1983), "Ahura", Encyclopaedia Iranica 1, New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul, pp. 682-683 
Kuiper, Bernardus Franciscus Jacobus (1976), "Ahura Mazda 'Lord Wisdom'?", Indo-Iranian Journal 18 (1-2): 25-42, doi:10.1163/000000076790079465 
Ware, James R.; Kent, Roland G. (1924), "The Old Persian Cuneiform Inscriptions of Artaxerxes II and Artaxerxes III", Transactions and Proceedings of the American Philological Association (The Johns Hopkins University Press) 55: 52-61, doi:10.2307/283007, JSTOR 283007 
Kent, Roland G. (1950), Old Persian: Grammar, texts, lexicon, New Haven: American Oriental Society, ISBN 0-940490-33-1 
Andrea, Alfred; James H. Overfield (2000), The Human Record: Sources of Global History : To 1700 4 (Illustrated ed.), Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, ISBN 978-0-618-04245-6 
Schlerath, Bernfried (1983), "Ahurani", Encyclopaedia Iranica 1, New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul, pp. 683-684 
The Gathas application for iPhone & iPad
101 Names of Dadar Hormazd Android Application