Antonin Leopold Dvorak (/'dvorZa:k/ DVOR-zhahk or /di'vorZaek/ di-VOR-zhak; Czech: ['antoni:n 'leopolt 'dvora:k]; September 8, 1841 - May 1, 1904) was a Czech composer. Following the nationalist example of Bedrich Smetana, Dvorak frequently employed aspects, specifically rhythms, of the folk music of Moravia and his native Bohemia (then parts of the Austrian Empire and now constituting the Czech Republic). Dvorak's own style has been described as 'the fullest recreation of a national idiom with that of the symphonic tradition, absorbing folk influences and finding effective ways of using them'.
Dvorak displayed his musical gifts at an early age, being an apt student of violin playing from age 6. The first public performances of his works were in Prague in 1872 and, with special success, in 1873, when he was age 31. Seeking recognition beyond the Prague area, he first submitted a score of his First Symphony to a prize competition in Germany, but he did not win, and the manuscript, not returned, was lost until rediscovered many years later. Then in 1874 he first made a submission for the Austrian State Prize for Composition, including scores of two further symphonies and other works. Brahms, unbeknownst to Dvorak, was the leading member of the jury and was highly impressed. The prize was awarded to Dvorak for 1874 and again in 1876 and in 1877, when Brahms and the prominent critic Eduard Hanslick, also a member of the jury, made themselves known to him. Brahms recommended Dvorak to his publisher, Simrock, who soon afterward commissioned what became the Slavonic Dances, Op. 46. These were highly praised by the Berlin music critic Louis Ehlert in 1878, the sheet music (of the original piano 4-hands version) had excellent sales, and Dvorak's international reputation at last was launched.
Dvorak's first piece of a religious nature, his setting of Stabat Mater, was premiered in Prague in 1880. It was very successfully performed in London in 1883, leading to many other performances in the United Kingdom and United States. In his career, Dvorak made nine invited visits to England, often conducting performances of his own works. His Seventh Symphony was written for London. After a brief conducting stint in Russia in 1890, Dvorak was appointed as a professor at the Prague Conservatory in 1891. In 1890-1891, he wrote his Dumky Trio, one of his most successful chamber music pieces. In 1892, Dvorak moved to the United States and became the director of the National Conservatory of Music of America in New York City. While in the United States, Dvorak wrote his two most successful orchestral works. The Symphony From the New World spread his reputation worldwide. His Cello Concerto is the most highly regarded of all cello concerti. Also, he wrote his American String Quartet, his most appreciated piece of chamber music. But shortfalls in payment of his salary, along with increasing recognition in Europe and an onset of homesickness, led him to leave the United States in 1895 and return to Bohemia.
Dvorak's ten operas all have librettos in Czech and were intended to convey Czech national spirit, as were some of his choral works. By far the most successful of the operas is Rusalka. Among his smaller works, the seventh Humoresque and the song "Songs My Mother Taught Me" are also widely performed and recorded. He has been described as "arguably the most versatile...composer of his time".


== Biography ==


=== Early years ===

Dvorak was born in Nelahozeves, near Prague (then part of Bohemia in the Austrian Empire, now Czech Republic), the eldest son of Frantisek Dvorak (1814-1894) and his wife Anna, nee Zdenkova (1820-1882). Frantisek worked as an innkeeper, a professional player of the zither, and a butcher. Anna was the daughter of Josef Zdenek, the bailiff of Prince Lobkowitz. Anna and Frantisek married on November 17, 1840. Dvorak was the first of fourteen children, eight of whom survived infancy. Dvorak was baptized as a Roman Catholic in the church of St. Andrew in the village. Dvorak's years in Nelahozeves nurtured the strong Christian faith and love for his Bohemian heritage that so strongly influenced his music. In 1847, Dvorak entered primary school and learned to play violin from his teacher Joseph Spitz. He showed early talent and skill, playing in a village band and in church. Frantisek was pleased with his son's gifts. At the age of 13, through the influence of his father, Dvorak was sent to Zlonice to live with his uncle Antonin Zdenek in order to learn the German language. His first composition, the Forget-Me-Not Polka in C (Polka pomnenka) was written possibly as early as 1855.

Dvorak took organ, piano and violin lessons from his German-language teacher Anton Liehmann. Liehmann also taught the young boy music theory and introduced him to the composers of the time; Dvorak had much regard for Liehmann despite his teacher's violent temper. Liehmann was the church organist in Zlonice and sometimes let Antonin play the organ at services. Dvorak took further organ and music-theory lessons at Ceska Kamenice with Franz Hanke, who encouraged his musical talents even further and was more sympathetic. At the age of 16, through the urging of Liehmann and Zdenek, Frantisek allowed his son to become a musician, on the condition that the boy should work toward a career as an organist. After leaving for Prague in September 1857, Dvorak entered the city's Organ School, studying singing with Josef Zvonar, theory with Frantisek Blazek, and organ with Joseph Foerster, who not only was a professor at the Prague Conservatory, but a composer for the organ; his son Josef Bohuslav Foerster became a better known composer. Dvorak also took an additional language course to improve his German and worked as an "extra" violist in numerous bands and orchestras, including the orchestra of the St. Cecilia Society. Dvorak graduated from the Organ School in 1859. He applied unsuccessfully for a position as an organist at St. Henry's Church, but remained undaunted in pursuing a musical career.
In 1858, he joined Karel Komzak's orchestra, with whom he performed in Prague's restaurants and at balls. The high professional level of the ensemble attracted the attention of Jan Nepomuk Mayr, who engaged the whole orchestra in the Bohemian Provisional Theater Orchestra. Dvorak played viola in the orchestra beginning in 1862. Dvorak could hardly afford concert tickets, but playing in the orchestra gave him a chance to hear music, mainly operas. In July 1863, Dvorak played in a program devoted to the German composer Richard Wagner, who conducted the orchestra. Dvorak had had "unbounded admiration" for Wagner since 1857. In 1862, Dvorak had begun composing his first string quartet. In 1864, Dvorak agreed to share the rent of a flat located in Prague's Zizkov district with five other people, who also included violinist Moric Anger and Karel Cech, who later became a singer. In 1866, Mayr was replaced as chief conductor by Bedrich Smetana. Dvorak was making about $7.50 a month. The constant need to supplement his income pushed him to give piano lessons. It was through these piano lessons that he met his future wife. He originally fell in love with his pupil and colleague from the Provisional Theater, Josefina Cermakova, for whom he apparently composed the song-cycle "Cypress Trees". However, she never returned his love and ended up marrying another man. In 1873 Dvorak married Josefina's younger sister, Anna Cermakova (1854-1931). They had nine children together, three of whom died in infancy.


=== Composer and organist ===

Dvorak called his String Quintet in A Minor (1861) his Opus 1, and his First String Quartet (1862) his Opus 2, although the chronological Burghauser Catalogue numbers these as B.6 and B.7, showing five earlier compositions without opus numbers. In the early 1860s, Dvorak also made his first symphonic attempts, some of which he self-critically burned. The manuscript of a symphony in C minor without opus number, B.9, composed in 1865, was preserved. This symphony has come to be numbered as Dvorak's First (see under "Works"). His first composing attempts passed without critical reception or public performances. His compositions up through 1870, according to the Burghauser Catalogue either had no known premieres, or were premiered in 1888 or later. For example, the Third String Quartet, B. 18, was written in about 1869 but first published in 1964 and premiered in 1969. In 1870, he composed his first opera, Alfred, over the course of five months from May to October. Its overture was first publicly performed as late as 1905, and the full opera only in 1938.
In 1871 Dvorak left the Provisional Theatre orchestra in order to have more time for composing. Up through 1871 Dvorak gave opus numbers only up to 5 among his first 26 compositions. The first press mention of Antonin Dvorak appeared in the Hudebni listy journal in June 1871, and the first publicly performed composition was the song Vzpominani ("Reminiscence", October 1871, musical evenings of L. Prochazka). The opera The King and the Charcoal Burner was returned to Dvorak from the Provisional Theatre and said to be unperformable. Its overture was premiered in 1872 in a Philharmonic concert conducted by Bedrich Smetana, but the full opera with the original score only in 1929. Clapham says Dvorak realized he had gone to "extremes in attempting to follow the example of Wagner." In 1873-74 he reset "the King and Charcoal Burner libretto entirely afresh, in a totally different manner", without using "anything from the ill-fated earlier version". The alternate opera, called King and Charcoal Burner II, B.42, was premiered in Prague in 1874.

On leaving the National Theater Orchestra after his marriage, Dvorak secured the job of organist at St. Adalbert's Church in Prague under Josef Foerster, his former teacher at the Organ School. The job paid "a mere pittance", but it was "a welcome addition for the young couple." Despite these circumstances, Dvorak still managed to compose a substantial body of music around this time.
In November 1872, Dvorak's Piano Quintet in A major, Op. 5, was performed in Prague, by a "splendid team of players" organized by Prochazka. It was the first piece played in a concert. In March 1873, his Czech patriotic cantata The Heirs of the White Mountain was performed by the Prague Hlahol Choral Society of 300 singers (conducted by his friend and supporter Karel Bendl) to a warm response from both audience and critics, making it an "unqualified success." So in Prague, Dvorak's compositions were coming to be recognized.
When Dvorak turned age 33 in 1874, however, he remained almost unknown as a composer, outside the area of Prague. He applied for the Austrian State Prize ("Stipendium") for composition and won the prize for 1874, awarded in February 1875, by a jury consisting of the critic Eduard Hanslick, Johann Herbeck, director of the State Opera, and Brahms. It seems that Brahms had only recently joined the jury, as he was not on it during calendar 1874, according to Hanslick in 1879. Hanslick had first-hand knowledge, as a continuing member of the jury (at least 1874-1877). But Brahms had had time and opportunity to appreciate Dvorak's 1874 submission. Botstein says the jury was "to award financial support to talented composers in need" in the Austro-Hungarian Empire. Brahms found a "massive submission" from Dvorak, "fifteen works including two symphonies, several overtures and a song cycle." Brahms was "visibly overcome" by the "mastery and talent" of Dvorak. The two symphonies were Dvorak's third and fourth, both of which had been premiered in Prague in the spring of 1874.
Clapham gives the official report for the 1874 prize, saying Dvorak was a relatively impoverished music teacher who "has submitted 15 compositions, among them symphonies, which display an undoubted talent ...The applicant ... deserves a grant to ease his straitened circumstances and free him from anxiety in his creative work." It says he had not yet owned a piano. Before being married, he had lodged with five other men, one of whom owned a small "spinet" piano.
In 1875, the year his first son was born, Dvorak composed his second string quintet, his 5th Symphony, Piano Trio No. 1, and Serenade for Strings in E. He again entered but this time did not win the Austrian State Prize. He did win it in 1876, and then felt free to resign his position as an organist. In 1877 he wrote the "Symphonic Variations" and Ludevit Prochazka conducted its premiere in Prague.


=== International reputation ===

Dvorak entered the Austrian Prize competition again in 1877, submitting his Moravian Duets and other music, possibly his Piano Concerto. He did not learn the outcome until December. Then, he received a personal letter from the music critic Eduard Hanslick, who had also been on the juries awarding the prizes. The letter not only notified Dvorak that he had again won the prize, but made known to him for the first time that Brahms and Hanslick had been on the jury. The letter conveyed an offer of friendly assistance of the two in making Dvorak's music known outside his Czech motherland. Within the month December 1877, Dvorak wrote his String Quartet no. 9 in D minor and dedicated it to Brahms. Both Brahms and Hanslick had been much impressed by the Moravian Duets, and Brahms recommended them to his publisher, Simrock, who published them with success. Having in mind Brahms's well-received Hungarian Dances, Simrock commissioned Dvorak to write something of the same nature. Dvorak submitted his Slavonic Dances, Op. 46 in 1878, first for two pianos, but when requested by Simrock, also in an orchestral version. These were an immediate and great success. On December 15, 1878, the leading music critic Louis Ehlert in the Berlin "Nationalzeitung" published a review of the Moravian Duets and Slavonic Dances, saying that the "Dances" would make their way "round the world" and "a heavenly naturalness flows through this music." "There was a run on the German music shops for the dances and duets of this hitherto ... unknown composer." The dances were played in 1879 in concerts in France, England, and the United States. Later Simrock requested further Slavonic Dances, which Dvorak supplied in his Op. 72, 1886
In 1879 Dvorak wrote his String Sextet. Simrock showed the score to the leading violinist Joseph Joachim, who with others premiered it in November of that year. Joachim became a "chief champion" of Dvorak's chamber music. In that same year, Dvorak also wrote his Violin Concerto. In December he dedicated the piece to Joachim and sent him the score. The next spring the two discussed the score and Dvorak revised it extensively, but Joachim was still not comfortable with it. The concerto was premiered in Prague in October 1883 by the violinist Frantisek Ondricek, who also played it in Vienna with conductor Hans Richter in December of that year. Twice later, Joachim was scheduled to play the concerto, but both times the arrangements fell through and he never did play it.
Hans Richter asked Dvorak to compose his Symphony No. 6 for the Vienna Philharmonic, intending to premiere it in December 1880. However, Dvorak later discovered that, despite this intention, members of the orchestra objected to performing works by the composer in two consecutive seasons, due to "anti-Czech feeling." Adolf Cech therefore conducted the premiere of the symphony at a concert of the Philharmonia society (in Czech: spolek Filharmonie, predecessor of the Czech Philharmonic) on March 25, 1881, in Prague. Richter did eventually conduct the piece in London in 1882 and always retained an interest in Dvorak's compositions.


=== Reception in Britain ===
Dvorak's Stabat Mater (1880) was performed and very well received at the Royal Albert Hall in London on March 10, 1883, conducted by Joseph Barnby. The success "sparked off a whole series of performances in England and the United States", a year ahead of appreciation in Germany and Austria. Dvorak was invited to visit Britain where he appeared to great acclaim in 1884. The London Philharmonic Society commissioned Dvorak to conduct concerts in London, and his performances were well received there. In response to the commission, Dvorak wrote his Symphony No. 7 and conducted the premiere of the symphony at St. James's Hall on April 22, 1885. On a visit later in 1885, Dvorak presented his cantata The Spectre's Bride, in a concert August 27. He had arrived a week early to conduct rehearsals of the chorus of 500 voices and orchestra of 150. The performance was "a greater triumph than any" Dvorak "had had in his life up to that time...following this phenomenal success, choral societies in the English-speaking countries hastened to prepare and present the new work." Dvorak visited Britain nine times in total, often conducting his own works there. In 1887, Richter conducted the Symphonic Variations in London and Vienna to great acclaim (they had been written ten years earlier and Dvorak had allowed them to languish after initial lack of interest from his publishers). Richter wrote to Dvorak of the London performance, "at the hundreds of concerts I have conducted during my life, no new work has been as successful as yours."


=== The years 1888-1891 ===
But a performance of Stabat Mater in Vienna, in February 1888, fell victim to more anti-Czech feeling and what Dvorak called "destructive criticism." He heartily thanked Richter for his "courage and devoted sympathy." In 1890, influenced by Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky, Dvorak also visited Russia, and conducted the orchestras in Moscow and in St. Petersburg. In 1891, Dvorak received an honorary degree from the University of Cambridge, and was offered a position at the Prague Conservatory as professor of composition and instrumentation. At first he refused the offer, but then later accepted; this change of mind was seemingly a result of a quarrel with his publisher, Simrock, over payment for his Eighth Symphony. His Requiem premiered later that year in Birmingham at the Triennial Music Festival.


=== The United States ===

From 1892 to 1895, Dvorak was the director of the National Conservatory of Music in New York City. He began at a then-staggering $15,000 annual salary. Emanuel Rubin describes the Conservatory and Dvorak's time there. The Conservatory had been founded by Jeannette Thurber, a wealthy and philanthropic woman, who made it open to women students as well as men and to blacks as well as whites, which was unusual for the times. Dvorak's original contract provided for three hours a day of work, including teaching and conducting, six days a week, with four months' vacation each summer. The `Panic of 1893,' a severe economic depression, depleted the assets of the Thurber family and other patrons of the Conservatory. In 1894 Dvorak's salary was cut to $8000 per year and moreover was paid only irregularly. The Conservatory was located at 126-128 East 17th Street, but was demolished in 1911 and replaced by what is today a high school.
Dvorak's main goal in America was to discover "American Music" and engage in it, much as he had used Czech folk idioms within his music. Shortly after his arrival in America in 1892, Dvorak wrote a series of newspaper articles reflecting on the state of American music. He supported the concept that African-American and Native American music should be used as a foundation for the growth of American music. He felt that through the music of Native Americans and African-Americans, Americans would find their own national style of music. Here Dvorak met Harry Burleigh, who later became one of the earliest African-American composers. Burleigh introduced Dvorak to traditional American spirituals.
In the winter and spring of 1893, Dvorak was commissioned by the New York Philharmonic to write Symphony No.9, "From the New World", which was premiered under the baton of Anton Seidl, to tumultuous applause. Clapham writes that "without question this was one of the greatest triumphs, and very possibly the greatest triumph of all that Dvorak experienced" in his life, and when the Symphony was published it was "seized on by conductors and orchestras" all over the world.
Two months before leaving for America, Dvorak had hired Josef Jan KovarIk, who had just finished violin studies at the Prague Conservatory and was about to return to the United States, to serve as his secretary and to live with the Dvorak family. He had come from the Czech-speaking community of Spillville, Iowa, where his father Jan Josef Kovarik was a schoolmaster. Dvorak decided to spend the summer of 1893 in Spillville, along with all his family. While there he composed the String Quartet in F (the "American"), and the String Quintet in E-flat, as well as a Sonatina for violin and piano. He also conducted a performance of his Eighth Symphony at the Columbian Exposition in Chicago that same year.
In the winter of 1894-1895, Dvorak wrote his Cello Concerto in B minor, Op. 104, B. 191, completed in February 1895. However, his partially unpaid salary, together with increasing recognition in Europe - he had been made an honorary member of the Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde in Vienna - and a remarkable amount of homesickness made him decide to return to Bohemia. He informed Thurber that he was leaving. Dvorak and his wife left New York before the end of the spring term with no intention of returning.
Dvorak's New York home was located at 327 East 17th Street, near the intersection of what is today called Perlman Place. It was in this house that both the B minor Cello Concerto and the New World Symphony were written within a few years. Despite protests, from Czech President Vaclav Havel amongst others, who wanted the house preserved as a historical site, it was demolished in 1991 to make room for a Beth Israel Medical Center residence for people with AIDS. To honor Dvorak, however, a statue of him was erected in nearby Stuyvesant Square.
Brahms continued to try to "clear a path for" Dvorak, "the only contemporary whom he considered really worthy." While Dvorak was in America, Simrock was still publishing his music in Germany, and Brahms corrected proofs for him. Dvorak said it was hard to understand why Brahms would "take on the very tedious job of proofreading. I don't believe there is another musician of his stature in the whole world who would do such a thing."


=== Return to Europe and last years ===

Dvorak, his wife and Otakar returned from the United States on 27 April 1895, and he was careful to avoid spreading the news about his return. However, after a performance of Dimitrij at the National Theater on May 19, Dvorak fled to the family country cottage in Vysoka. Dvorak's first love and later sister-in-law, Josefina Kaunitzova, nee Cermakova, died in May 1895. He and she had maintained friendly relations over the years. After her death he revised the coda of his Cello Concerto in her memory. During Dvorak's final years, he concentrated on composing opera and chamber music. In October 1895, he resumed his professorship at the Prague Conservatory. Between 1895 to 1897, he completed his string quartets in A-flat major and G major, and also worked on the cycle of symphonic poems inspired by the collection Kytice by Karel Jaromir Erben. His chamber works directly influenced the establishment of the Czech Quartet (1891). As seen from Burghauser (1960), in 1896 Dvorak wrote his five Symphonic Poems, but after that completed few works per year, mainly operas: Jakobin in 1896, nothing in 1897, only The Devil and Kate in 1898/99, Rusalka in 1900, two songs and "Recitatives" in 1900/01, and finally the opera Armida in 1902/3. Rusalka became the most popular of all Dvorak's ten operas and gained an international reputation (below under Works, Operas).
In 1896 he visited London for the last time to conduct the premiere of his Cello Concerto in B minor by the London Philharmonic. Also in 1896, Brahms tried to persuade Dvorak, who had several children, to move to Vienna. Brahms said he himself had no dependents and "If you need anything, my fortune is at your disposal". Clapham writes "Dvorak was deeply moved and tears came to his wife's eyes, but it was quite impossible for him, a Czech, to contemplate leaving Bohemia." Brahms at the time had not so long left to live, as he died 3 April 1897. Also, Brahms hoped to gain an ally in Vienna to "counterbalance the influence of" Bruckner.

In 1897 Dvorak's daughter Otilie married his student, the composer Josef Suk. In the same year, Dvorak visited Brahms on his deathbed and went to his funeral 6 April 1897. In November he was appointed a member of the jury for the Viennese Artists' Stipendium. He was informed in November 1898 that Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria-Hungary would award him a gold medal for Litteris et Artibus, which took place at an audience in June 1899. On 4 April 1900 Dvorak conducted his last concert with the Czech Philharmonic, performing Brahms's Tragic Overture, Schubert's "Unfinished" Symphony, Beethoven's 8th Symphony. and Dvorak's own symphonic poem The Wild Dove. In April 1901, The Emperor appointed him a member of the Austro-Hungarian House of Lords, along with the leading Czech poet Jaroslav Vrchlicky. Dvorak also succeeded Antonin Bennewitz as director of the Prague Conservatory from November 1901 until his death. Dvorak's 60th birthday was celebrated as a national event. First, around the actual date, six of his operas and the oratorio St. Ludmila were performed in Prague, but Dvorak was away in Vienna; then in November 1901 came the "postponed official birthday party ... In many towns all over Bohemia and Moravia, the Czech people celebrated his birthday."
On 25 March 1904 Dvorak had to leave a rehearsal of Armida because of illness. The first Czech Musical Festival, in April 1904, had "a programme consisting almost entirely" of Dvorak's music (Leos Janacek was disappointed that none of his music was performed.) "Seventy-six choral associations" from all over Bohemia gathered in Prague, and "sixteen thousand singers" sang Dvorak's oratorio Saint Ludmila. "Thousands of listeners celebrated" the symphony "From the New World". Dvorak himself was forced by illness to "take to his bed" and so was unable to attend.
Dvorak had an "attack of influenza" on 18 April and died on 1 May 1904, of an undiagnosed cause, following five weeks of illness, at the age of 62, leaving many unfinished works. His funeral service was held on 5 May, and his ashes were interred in the Vysehrad cemetery in Prague, beneath a bust by Czech sculptor Ladislav Saloun.


== Style ==

Many of Dvorak's compositions, such as the Slavonic Dances and his large collection of songs, were directly inspired by Czech, Moravian, and other Slavic traditional music. As the basis for his works, Dvorak frequently used Slavic folk dance forms, such as skocna, Bohemian odzemek, furiant, sousedska, and spacirka, Polish mazurka and polonaise or Yugoslav Kolo, and also folk song forms of Slavic peoples including Ukrainian dumka. His 16 Slavonic Dances. Op. 46, which first gained him a wide reputation, and Op. 72, include at least one with each of the given names. He also wrote an orchestral Polonaise (1879). He called the third movement of his 6th Symphony "Scherzo (Furiant)". His Dumky Trio is one of his best-known chamber works. His major works reflect his heritage and the love he had for his native land. Dvorak followed in the footsteps of Bedrich Smetana, the composer who created the modern Czech musical style.
Dvorak had been an admirer of Wagner's music since 1857. Late in life, he said that Wagner "was so great a genius that he was capable of doing things that were beyond the reach of other composers." Wagner especially influenced Dvorak's operas, but also some orchestral pieces. According to Clapham, the theme of the Andante Sostenuto from his fourth symphony "could almost have come directly out of Tannhauser".
From 1873 on, Dvorak's style was "moving steadily in the direction of classical models." To be more specific about "classical models", in 1894 Dvorak wrote an article in which he said the composers of the past he admired most were Bach, Mozart, Beethoven and Schubert. As the article was specifically on Schubert, three years in advance of the centennial of Schubert's birth, it seems Dvorak had a special predilection toward Schubert.


== Works ==

Dvorak wrote in a variety of forms: his nine symphonies generally stick to classical models, but he also worked in the newly developed form of symphonic poem. Many of his works show the influence of Czech genuine folk music, both in terms of elements such as rhythms and melodic shapes; amongst these are the two sets of Slavonic Dances, the Symphonic Variations, and the overwhelming majority of his songs, but echoes of such influence are also found in his major choral works. Dvorak also wrote operas (of which the best known is Rusalka); serenades for string orchestra and wind ensemble; chamber music (including a number of string quartets and quintets); and piano music.


=== Numbering ===
While a large number of Dvorak's works were given opus numbers, these did not always bear a logical relationship to the order in which they were either written or published. To achieve better sales, some publishers such as N. Simrock preferred to present budding composers as being well established, by giving some relatively early works much higher opus numbers than their chronological order would merit. In other cases, Dvorak deliberately provided new works with lower opus numbers to be able to sell them outside contract obligations to other publishers. An example is the Czech Suite which Dvorak didn't want to sell to Simrock, and had published with Schlesinger as Op. 39 instead of Op.52. In this way it could come about that the same opus number was given to more than one of Dvorak's works; for example the opus number 12, which was assigned, successively, to: the opera King and Charcoal Burner (1871), the Concert Overture in F (1871, derived from the opera), the String Quartet No. 6 in A minor (1873), the Furiant in G minor for piano (1879), and the Dumka in C minor for piano (1884). In yet other cases, a work was given as many as three different opus numbers by different publishers.
The sequential numbering of his symphonies has also been confused: (a) they were initially numbered by order of publication, not composition; (b) the first four symphonies to be composed were published after the last five; and (c) the last five symphonies were not published in order of composition. This explains why, for example, the New World Symphony was originally published as No. 5, was later known as No. 8, and definitively renumbered as No. 9 in the critical editions published in the 1950s.
All of Dvorak's works were chronologically catalogued by Jarmil Burghauser. As an example, in the Burghauser catalogue, the New World Symphony, Op. 95, is B.178. Scholars today often refer to Dvorak's works by their B numbers (for Burghauser), partly because many early works do not have opus numbers. References to the traditional opus numbers are still common, in part because the opus numbers have historical continuity with earlier scores and printed programs. The opus numbers are still more likely to appear in printed programs for performances.


=== Symphonies ===

During Dvorak's life, only five of his symphonies were widely known. The first published was his sixth, dedicated to Hans Richter. After Dvorak's death, research uncovered four unpublished symphonies, of which the manuscript of the first had even been lost to the composer himself. This led to an unclear situation in which the New World Symphony has alternately been called the 5th, 8th and 9th. This article uses the modern numbering system, according to the order in which they were written.
With their broadly lyrical style and accessibility to the listener, Dvorak's symphonies seem to derive from the Schubertian tradition; but, as Taruskin suggests, the great difference was Dvorak's use of "cyclic" form, especially in his later symphonies (and indeed concertos), whereby he "occasionally recycled themes from movement to movement to a degree which lent his works a tinge of secret 'programmaticism'."
Symphony No. 1 in C minor, Op. 3, was written in 1865 when Dvorak was 24 years old. was later subtitled The Bells of Zlonice, referring to the time Dvorak from ages 13 to 16 had spent in the village of Zlonice and in the church there. Like the Symphony No. 2 in B-flat major, Op. 4, also in 1865, it is, despite touches of originality, too wayward to maintain a place in the standard symphonic repertory.
Symphony No. 3 in E-flat major, Op. 10 (c. 1873), shows the impact of Dvorak's recent acquaintance with the music of Richard Wagner. This influence is less evident in Symphony No. 4 in D minor, Op. 13, except for the start of the second movement.
Symphony No. 5 in F major, Op. 76, and Symphony No. 6 in D major, Op. 60,are largely pastoral in nature. The Sixth, published in 1880, shows a resemblance to the Symphony No. 2 of Brahms, particularly in the outer movements, though this similarity is belied by the third-movement furiant, a vivid Czech dance. This was the symphony that made Dvorak internationally known as a symphonic composer.
Symphony No. 7 in D minor of 1885, Op. 70, was written when Dvorak was struggling to have his Czech operas accepted in Vienna, feeling pressure to write operas in German.
Symphony No. 8 in G major, Op. 88, is characterized by a warmer and more optimistic tone. Karl Schumann (in booklet notes for a recording of all the symphonies by Rafael Kubelik) compares it to the works of Gustav Mahler.
Symphony No. 9 in E minor, Op. 95, is also known by its subtitle, From the New World, or as the New World Symphony. Dvorak wrote it between January and May 1893, while he was in New York. At the time of its first performance, he claimed that he used elements from American music such as spirituals and Native American music in this work, but he later denied this. In an article published in the New York Herald on December 15, 1893, he wrote, "[In the 9th symphony] I have simply written original themes embodying the peculiarities of the Indian music." Neil Armstrong took a recording of the New World Symphony to the Moon during the Apollo 11 mission, the first Moon landing, in 1969, and in 2009 it was voted the favourite symphony in a poll run by ABC Classic FM in Australia.
Many conductors have recorded cycles of the symphonies, including Karel Ancerl, Istvan Kertesz, Rafael Kubelik, Otmar Suitner, Libor Pesek, Zdenek Macal, Vaclav Neumann, Witold Rowicki, and Neeme Jarvi.
Adolf Cech premiered more of Dvorak's symphonies than anyone else. He conducted the first performances of Nos. 2, 5 and 6; the composer premiered Nos. 7 and 8; Bedrich Smetana led Nos. 3 and 4; Anton Seidl conducted No. 9; and Milan Sachs premiered No. 1.


=== Symphonic poems ===
Franz Liszt had invented the form Symphonic Poem, a relatively new one, never adopted by more "conservative" Romantic composers such as Brahms. Dvorak wrote five symphonic poems, all in 1896-1897, and they have sequential opus numbers: The Water Goblin, Op. 107; The Noon Witch, Op. 108; The Golden Spinning Wheel, Op. 109; The Wild Dove, Op. 110; and A Hero's Song, Op. 111. The first four of these works are based upon ballads from the collection Kytice by the Czech folklorist Karel Jaromir Erben. A Hero's Song is based on a program of Dvorak's devising and is believed to be autobiographical.


=== Choral works ===

To Dvorak's main choral works belong his setting of Stabat Mater (the longest extant setting of that work), his Requiem, his setting of the Te Deum and his Mass in D major.
The Stabat Mater, Op. 58, is an extensive (c. 90 minutes) vocal-instrumental sacred work for soli (soprano, alto, tenor and bass), choir and orchestra based on the text of an old church hymn with the same name. The first inspiration for creating this piece was the death of the composer's daughter, Josefa.
Antonin Dvorak composed his Requiem in 1890, at the beginning of the peak period of his career. Dvorak was a deeply religious man, and this work reflects his faith and spirituality. The premiere of the work took place on October 9, 1891 in Birmingham, conducted by Dvorak himself. and was "very successful". It had an outstanding success in Boston 30 November 1892: "the composer was frequently applauded between numbers and given a most enthusiastic ovation at the end.". In Vienna it was greeted, belatedly, in 1901: "The Vienna performance in March 1901 was a triumph of Dvorak's music, as if the Viennese public wished thereby to make up for their earlier, sometimes cool reception of his works."
The Te Deum, Op. 103, is a cantata for soprano and baritone solo, choir and orchestra to the Latin text of the famous hymn Te Deum (God, we laud You). It was composed in 1892 and dedicated to the 400th anniversary of the discovery of America. The composition had been completed before Dvorak moved to America and was commissioned by Jeanette Thurber in 1891, when the composer accepted a position as director of her school. The composition, which is on a more intimate scale than the Stabat Mater and Requiem, was premiered at Dvorak's first concert in New York on October 21, 1892.
The Mass in D major (originally numbered as Op. 76, finally as Op. 86) was originally intended for organ, solo voices and small choir. The work was given its final shape in the year 1892 when, in response to a request from the Novello publishers of London, Dvorak arranged his Mass for a symphony orchestra.
The oratorio Saint Ludmila was a huge success in Bohemia and Moravia, sung at events in Dvorak's honor in 1901 and 1904. Its text, in Czech, may have limited its audience among non-Czech speakers. The piece had a considerable success in England in October 1886, with an audience on the 15th "in raptures ... the critics praised the music in the warmest terms", and on the 29th, there was a "large and equally enthusiastic audience, and once again the critics were full of praise", but a drawback was that the libretto and especially its translation into English "were regarded on all sides as unsatisfactory."
The cantata The Spectre's Bride, Op. 69, B. 135, performed in 1885 at the Birmingham, England, Musical Festival, was the greatest success in Dvorak's career up to that point.


=== Concerti ===
The writer Harold C. Schonberg suggested that Dvorak wrote "an attractive Piano Concerto in G minor with a rather ineffective piano part, a beautiful Violin Concerto in A minor, and a supreme Cello Concerto in B minor". All the concerti are in the classical three-movement form.
The Concerto for Piano and Orchestra in G minor, Op. 33 was the first of three concerti that Dvorak composed, and it is perhaps the least known of the three.
The Concerto for Violin and Orchestra in A minor, Op. 53 was written in 1878 for the great violinist Joseph Joachim, whom Dvorak had met and admired. He finished it in 1879, but Joachim was skeptical of the work. The concerto was premiered in 1883 in Prague by the violinist Frantisek Ondricek, who also gave its first performances in Vienna and London.
The Concerto for Cello and Orchestra in B minor, Op. 104 was the last composed of Dvorak's concerti. He wrote it in 1894-1895 for his friend the cellist Hanus Wihan. Wihan and others had asked for a cello concerto for some time, but Dvorak always refused, stating that the cello was a fine orchestral instrument but completely insufficient for a solo concerto. Dvorak composed the concerto in New York while serving as the Director of the National Conservatory. In 1894 Victor Herbert, who was also teaching at the Conservatory, had written a cello concerto and presented it in a series of concerts. Dvorak attended at least two performances of Victor Herbert's cello concerto and was inspired to fulfill Wihan's request for a cello concerto. Dvorak's concerto received its premiere in London on March 16, 1896, with the English cellist Leo Stern. The reception was "enthusiastic." Brahms said of the work: "Had I known that one could write a cello concerto like this, I would have written one long ago!" Agreeing with Schonberg, the cellist and author Robert Battey wrote "I believe it to be the greatest of all cello concertos...an opinion shared by most cellists". A compiler of discographies of Dvorak's music wrote that his is the "king" of cello concertos.
In 1865, early in his career, Dvorak had composed a Violoncello concerto in A major with Piano accompaniment, B. 10. Gunter Raphael in 1925-1929 produced a revised and orchestrated version. Dvorak's cataloguer Jarmil Burghauser made another orchestration and abridgement, published in 1975.


=== Chamber music ===
Over a period of almost 30 years, Dvorak's output of chamber music was prolific and diverse, composing more than 40 works for ensembles with strings.
In 1860 just after he finished his education at the Organ school, Dvorak composed his String Quintet No. 1 in A minor, Op. 1. Two more would follow, of which the String Quintet No. 2 in G major, Op. 77 from early 1875, is noteworthy for the use of a double bass. It was written for a chamber music competition sponsored by the Umelecka beseda (Artistic Circle), where it was unanimously awarded the prize of five ducats for the "distinction of theme, the technical skill in polyphonic composition, the mastery of form and the knowledge of the instruments" displayed. The String Quintet No.3 in E major, Op. 97, with a second viola added, was written near the end of his output for chamber ensemble during his American period in 1893, when he spent a summer holiday in Spillville, Iowa.
Within a year after completing his first string quintet, Dvorak completed his String Quartet No. 1 in A major, Op. 2, the first of his fourteen string quartets. For some time Dvorak was very tentative in his approach to quartets. In the 1880s Dvorak made a list of compositions he had destroyed, which lists two quartets and 2 other quartets. He may well have destroyed the scores, but only after the individual instrumental parts had been copied out. The number of errors in the parts makes it highly unlikely that he actually had them played. The quartets numbered 2 to 4 were probably composed between 1868 and 1870 and show the strong influence of the music of Richard Wagner. Dvorak kept the manuscripts of these quartets but did not give them opus numbers. They have numbers B.17, B.18, and B.19 in the Burghauser catalog. An Andante religioso from his fourth quartet was used five years later in his second string quintet Op. 77, as a second movement named Intermezzo: Nocturne, making this a five-movement composition. The two Quartets he wrote in 1873 show a stronger sense of form.
His most popular quartet is his twelfth, the American, Op. 96. He also composed two piano quintets, both in A major, of which the second, Op. 81, is the better known. He left a Terzetto for two violins and viola (Op. 74); two piano quartets, a string sextet; Op. 48; and four piano trios, including the Piano Trio No. 4 (subtitled Dumky), Op. 90. He also wrote a set of Bagatelles, Op. 47, for the unusual instrumentation of two violins, cello, and harmonium, two waltzes for string quartet, and a set of twelve love songs arranged for quartet, taken from his set of 18 songs originally composed in 1865 entitled Cypresses.


=== Operas ===
In a 1904 interview, Dvorak claimed that opera was 'the most suitable form for the nation'. If this nationalist sentiment was at the heart of his opera compositions, he also struggled to find a style straddling Czech traditional melody and the grand opera style of Giacomo Meyerbeer, which he experienced as lead viola player in the orchestra of Prague's Provisional Theatre between 1862 and 1871, and whose influence is very evident in his works such as Vanda and Dimitrij. His later interest in the music of Richard Wagner also affected his operas, evident in the very extensive rewrite of Dmitirij in 1894, following its failure at Vienna.
Of all his operas, only Rusalka, Op. 114, which contains the well-known aria "Mesicku na nebi hlubokem" ("Song to the Moon"), is played on contemporary opera stages with any frequency outside the Czech Republic. This is attributable to their uneven invention and libretti, and perhaps also their staging requirements -- The Jacobin, Armida, Vanda and Dimitrij need stages large enough to portray invading armies.
There is speculation by Dvorak scholars such as Michael Beckerman that portions of his Symphony No. 9 "From the New World", notably the second movement, were adapted from studies for a never-written opera about Hiawatha.


=== Songs ===
The song cycle of 10 Biblical Songs, op.99, was written in March 1894. It was at this time Dvorak was informed of the death of the famous conductor, and his close personal friend, Hans von Bulow. Just a month earlier, he had been grieved to hear that his father was near death, far away in Bohemia. Dvorak consoled himself in the Psalms. The resulting work, considered the finest of his song cycles, is based on the text of Czech Bible of Kralice. As fate would have it, his father expired 2 days after the completion of the work.
Another well known cycle is the seven Gypsy Songs (Czech Cikanske melodie) B. 104, Op. 55 which includes "Songs My Mother Taught Me" (the fourth of the set).
Dvorak created many other songs inspired by Czech national traditional music, such as the "Love Songs", "Evening Songs", etc.


=== Other works ===
From other important works, that show also the influence of Czech folk music, both in terms of rhythms and melodic shapes; perhaps the best known examples are the two sets of Slavonic Dances, written in two series. The first book, Op. 46 (1878), is predominantly Czech in respect to the forms represented. They were created for piano duet (one piano, four hands), but Dvorak proceeded to orchestrate the entire set, completing that version the same year. The second book, Op. 72 (as well as previous composed originally for piano) which came along nine years later, includes forms native to such other Slavic lands as Serbia, Poland and Ukraine.
Dvorak, however, in dealing with his own native idiom, did not use actual folk tunes in his dances, but created his own themes in the authentic style of traditional folk music, using only rhythms of original folk dances.
A work that does not fit into any of the above categories is the Symphonic Variations of 1877, the first set of orchestral variations on an original theme to be composed as a freestanding work. Originally unsuccessful and revived only after ten years, it has since established itself in the repertoire.


== Notable students ==


== Literature based on his works ==
Ian Krykorka has written a number of children's books based on some of Dvorak's operas.
Josef Skvorecky wrote Dvorak in Love about his life in America as Director of the National Conservatory for Music.


== References ==
Notes

References

Sources


== External links ==
Comprehensive Dvorak site
Works by Antonin Dvorak at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Antonin Dvorak at Internet Archive
List of Dvorak's works
Dvorak material in the BBC Radio 3 archives
Dvorak on Schubert "The Century", Volume 0048 Issue 3 (July 1894)
Collection of news articles and correspondence about Dvorak's stay in America
Antonin Dvorak Recordings at the Internet Archive
Free scores by Dvorak in the International Music Score Library Project
The Mutopia Project has compositions by Antonin Dvorak
References to Dvorak in European historic newspapers via The European Library