Isidore Auguste Marie Francois Xavier Comte (19 January 1798 - 5 September 1857), better known as Auguste Comte (French: [ogyst kot]), was a French philosopher. He was a founder of the discipline of sociology and of the doctrine of positivism. He is sometimes regarded as the first philosopher of science in the modern sense of the term.
Influenced by the utopian socialist Henri Saint-Simon, Comte developed the positive philosophy in an attempt to remedy the social malaise of the French Revolution, calling for a new social doctrine based on the sciences. Comte was a major influence on 19th-century thought, influencing the work of social thinkers such as Karl Marx, John Stuart Mill, and George Eliot. His concept of sociologie and social evolutionism set the tone for early social theorists and anthropologists such as Harriet Martineau and Herbert Spencer, evolving into modern academic sociology presented by Emile Durkheim as practical and objective social research.
Comte's social theories culminated in the "Religion of Humanity", which influenced the development of religious humanist and secular humanist organizations in the 19th century. Comte likewise coined the word altruisme (altruism).


== Life ==
Auguste Comte was born in Montpellier, Herault on 19 January 1798. After attending the Lycee Joffre and then the University of Montpellier, Comte was admitted to the Ecole Polytechnique in Paris. The Ecole Polytechnique was notable for its adherence to the French ideals of republicanism and progress. The Ecole closed in 1816 for reorganization, however, and Comte continued his studies at the medical school at Montpellier. When the Ecole Polytechnique reopened, he did not request readmission.
Following his return to Montpellier, Comte soon came to see unbridgeable differences with his Catholic and monarchist family and set off again for Paris, earning money by small jobs. In August 1817 he found an apartment at 36 rue Bonaparte in Paris' 6eme (where he lived until 1822) and later that year he became a student and secretary to Claude Henri de Rouvroy, Comte de Saint-Simon, who brought Comte into contact with intellectual society and greatly influenced his thought therefrom. During that time Comte published his first essays in the various publications headed by Saint-Simon, L'Industrie, Le Politique, and L'Organisateur (Charles Dunoyer and Charles Comte's Le Censeur Europeen), although he would not publish under his own name until 1819's "La separation generale entre les opinions et les desirs" ("The general separation of opinions and desires"). In 1824, Comte left Saint-Simon, again because of unbridgeable differences. Comte published a Plan de travaux scientifiques necessaires pour reorganiser la societe (1822) (Plan of scientific studies necessary for the reorganization of society). But he failed to get an academic post. His day-to-day life depended on sponsors and financial help from friends. Debates rage as to how much Comte appropriated the work of Saint-Simon.
Comte married Caroline Massin in 1825. In 1826, he was taken to a mental health hospital, but left without being cured - only stabilized by French alienist Jean-Etienne Dominique Esquirol - so that he could work again on his plan (he would later attempt suicide in 1827 by jumping off the Pont des Arts). In the time between this and their divorce in 1842, he published the six volumes of his Cours.
Comte developed a close friendship with John Stuart Mill. From 1844, he fell deeply in love with the Catholic Clotilde de Vaux, although because she was not divorced from her first husband their love was never consummated. After her death in 1846 this love became quasi-religious, and Comte, working closely with Mill (who was refining his own such system) developed a new "Religion of Humanity". John Kells Ingram, an adherent of Comte, visited him in Paris in 1855.
He published four volumes of Systeme de politique positive (1851-1854). His final work, the first volume of "La Synthese Subjective" ("The Subjective Synthesis"), was published in 1856.
Comte died in Paris on 5 September 1857 from stomach cancer and was buried in the famous Pere Lachaise Cemetery, surrounded by cenotaphs in memory of his mother, Rosalie Boyer, and of Clotilde de Vaux. His apartment from 1841-1857 is now conserved as the Maison d'Auguste Comte and is located at 10 rue Monsieur-le-Prince, in Paris' 6th arrondissement.


== Thought ==


=== Comte's positivism ===

Comte first described the epistemological perspective of positivism in The Course in Positive Philosophy, a series of texts published between 1830 and 1842. These texts were followed by the 1848 work, A General View of Positivism (published in English in 1865). The first three volumes of the Course dealt chiefly with the physical sciences already in existence (mathematics, astronomy, physics, chemistry, biology), whereas the latter two emphasised the inevitable coming of social science. Observing the circular dependence of theory and observation in science, and classifying the sciences in this way, Comte may be regarded as the first philosopher of science in the modern sense of the term. Comte was also the first to distinguish natural philosophy from science explicitly. For him, the physical sciences had necessarily to arrive first, before humanity could adequately channel its efforts into the most challenging and complex "Queen science" of human society itself. His View of Positivism would therefore set out to define, in more detail, the empirical goals of sociological method.
Comte offered an account of social evolution, proposing that society undergoes three phases in its quest for the truth according to a general 'law of three stages'. The idea bears some similarity to Karl Marx's view that human society would progress toward a communist peak. This is perhaps unsurprising as both were profoundly influenced by the early Utopian socialist, Henri de Saint-Simon, who was at one time Comte's teacher and mentor. Both Comte and Marx intended to develop, scientifically, a new secular ideology in the wake of European secularisation.
Comte's stages were (1) the theological stage, (2) the metaphysical stage, and (3) the positive stage. (1) The Theological stage was seen from the perspective of 19th century France as preceding the Enlightenment, in which man's place in society and society's restrictions upon man were referenced to God. Man blindly believed in whatever he was taught by his ancestors. He believed in a supernatural power. Fetishism played a significant role during this time. (2) By the "Metaphysical" stage, Comte referred not to the Metaphysics of Aristotle or other ancient Greek philosophers. Rather, the idea was rooted in the problems of French society subsequent to the revolution of 1789. This Metaphysical stage involved the justification of universal rights as being on a vauntedly higher plane than the authority of any human ruler to countermand, although said rights were not referenced to the sacred beyond mere metaphor. This stage is known as the stage of investigation, because people started reasoning and questioning although no solid evidence was laid. The stage of investigation was the beginning of a world that questioned authority and religion. (3) In the Scientific stage, which came into being after the failure of the revolution and of Napoleon, people could find solutions to social problems and bring them into force despite the proclamations of human rights or prophecy of the will of God. Science started to answer questions in full stretch. In this regard he was similar to Karl Marx and Jeremy Bentham. For its time, this idea of a Scientific stage was considered up-to-date, although from a later standpoint it is too derivative of classical physics and academic history. Comte's law of three stages was one of the first theories of social evolutionism.

The other universal law he called the "encyclopedic law." By combining these laws, Comte developed a systematic and hierarchical classification of all sciences, including inorganic physics (astronomy, earth science and chemistry) and organic physics (biology and, for the first time, physique sociale, later renamed sociologie). Independently from Emmanuel Joseph Sieyes's introduction of the term in 1780, Comte re-invented "sociologie", and introduced the term as a neologism, in 1838. Comte had earlier used the term "social physics", but that term had been appropriated by others, notably Adolphe Quetelet.

This idea of a special science--not the humanities, not metaphysics--for the social was prominent in the 19th century and not unique to Comte. It has recently been discovered that the term "sociology" - a term considered coined by Comte - had already been introduced in 1780, albeit with a different meaning, by the French essayist Emmanuel Joseph Sieyes (1748-1836). The ambitious--many would say grandiose--way that Comte conceived of this special science of the social, however, was unique. Comte saw this new science, sociology, as the last and greatest of all sciences, one which would include all other sciences and integrate and relate their findings into a cohesive whole. It has to be pointed out, however, that there was a seventh science, one even greater than sociology. Namely, Comte considered "Anthropology, or true science of Man [to be] the last gradation in the Grand Hierarchy of Abstract Science."

Comte's explanation of the Positive philosophy introduced the important relationship between theory, practice and human understanding of the world. On page 27 of the 1855 printing of Harriet Martineau's translation of The Positive Philosophy of Auguste Comte, we see his observation that, "If it is true that every theory must be based upon observed facts, it is equally true that facts can not be observed without the guidance of some theories. Without such guidance, our facts would be desultory and fruitless; we could not retain them: for the most part we could not even perceive them."
Comte's emphasis on the interconnectedness of social elements was a forerunner of modern functionalism. Nevertheless, as with many others of Comte's time, certain elements of his work are now viewed as eccentric and unscientific, and his grand vision of sociology as the centerpiece of all the sciences has not come to fruition.
His emphasis on a quantitative, mathematical basis for decision-making remains with us today. It is a foundation of the modern notion of Positivism, modern quantitative statistical analysis, and business decision-making. His description of the continuing cyclical relationship between theory and practice is seen in modern business systems of Total Quality Management and Continuous Quality Improvement where advocates describe a continuous cycle of theory and practice through the four-part cycle of plan, do, check, and act. Despite his advocacy of quantitative analysis, Comte saw a limit in its ability to help explain social phenomena.
The early sociology of Herbert Spencer came about broadly as a reaction to Comte; writing after various developments in evolutionary biology, Spencer attempted to reformulate the discipline in what we might now describe as socially Darwinistic terms.
Comte's fame today owes in part to Emile Littre, who founded The Positivist Review in 1867. Debates continue to rage, however, as to how much Comte appropriated from the work of his mentor, Henri de Saint-Simon.
Comte influenced the Young Turks political movement.


== The religion of humanity ==

In later years, Comte developed the 'religion of humanity' for positivist societies in order to fulfil the cohesive function once held by traditional worship. In 1849, he proposed a calendar reform called the 'positivist calendar'. For close associate John Stuart Mill, it was possible to distinguish between a "good Comte" (the author of the Course in Positive Philosophy) and a "bad Comte" (the author of the secular-religious system). The system was unsuccessful but met with the publication of Darwin's On the Origin of Species (1859) to influence the proliferation of various Secular Humanist organizations in the 19th century, especially through the work of secularists such as George Holyoake and Richard Congreve. Although Comte's English followers, including George Eliot and Harriet Martineau, for the most part rejected the full gloomy panoply of his system, they liked the idea of a religion of humanity and his injunction to "vivre pour autrui" ("live for others"), from which comes the word "altruism".


== Three Stages ==

"The law is this: that each of our leading conceptions - each branch of our knowledge - passes successively through three different theoretical conditions: the Theological, or fictitious; the Metaphysical, or abstract; and the Scientific, or positive." - Comte
Theological Stage
Fetishism
Polytheism
Monotheism

Metaphysical or Abstract Stage
Positive Stage


== Bibliography ==


=== Works ===
Comte, A.; A general view of positivism [Discours sur l'Esprit positif 1844] London, 1856 Internet Archive
Comte, A.; Bridges, J.H. (tr.); A General View of Positivism; Trubner and Co., 1865 (reissued by Cambridge University Press, 2009; ISBN 978-1-108-00064-2)
Comte, A.; Congrev, R. (tr.); The Catechism of Positive Religion; Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner and Co., 1891 (reissued by Cambridge University Press, 2009; ISBN 978-1-108-00087-1)
Comte, A; Martineau, H. (tr.); The Positive Philosophy of Auguste Comte; 2 volumes; Chapman, 1853 (reissued by Cambridge University Press, 2009; ISBN 978-1-108-00118-2) (but note that C.U.P. say "Martineau's abridged and more easily digestible version of Comte's work was intended to be readily accessible to a wide general readership, particularly those she felt to be morally and intellectually adrift", so this is not really Comte's own writings)
Comte, A.; Jones, H.S. (ed.); Comte: Early Political Writings; Cambridge University Press, 1998; ISBN 978-0-521-46923-4
Comte, A.; System of Positive Polity; various publishers
Comte, A.; Cours de Philosophie Positive, Tome II; Bachelier, Paris, 1835, https://www.gutenberg.org/files/31882/31882-h/31882-h.htm; scans of the six volumes are at Projet Gallica
When Ernest Renan published his Essais philosophiques, he clearly stated in their preface that all of them were the result of dialogues between his friend Comte and him, with an impossibility to remember who of them said, developed or modified what.


=== Secondary ===
Henri Gouhier, La vie d'Auguste Comte, Gallimard, 1931 ;
Jean Delvolve, Reflexions sur la pensee comtienne, Felix Alcan, 1932 ;
John Stuart Mill, Auguste Comte and Positivism, Trubner, 1865 ;
Laurent Fedi, Comte, Les Belles Lettres, 2000, reedition 2005 ;
Laurent Fedi, L'organicisme de Comte, in Auguste Comte aujourd'hui, M. Bourdeau, J.-F. Braunstein, A. Petit (dir), Kime, 2003, pp. 111-132 ;
Laurent Fedi, Auguste Comte, la disjonction de l'ideologie et de l'Etat, Cahiers philosophiques, ndeg94, 2003, pp. 99-110 ;
Laurent Fedi, Le monde clos contre l'univers infini : Auguste Comte et les enjeux humains de l'astronomie, La Mazarine, ndeg13, juin 2000, pp. 12-15 ;
Laurent Fedi, La contestation du miracle grec chez Auguste Comte, in L'Antiquite grecque au XIXe siecle : un exemplum conteste ?, C. Avlami (dir.), L'Harmattan, 2000, pp. 157-192 ;
Laurent Fedi, Auguste Comte et la technique, Revue d'histoire des sciences 53/2, 1999, pp. 265-293 ;
Henri Gouhier, La jeunesse d'Auguste Comte et la formation du positivisme, tome 1 : sous le signe de la liberte, Vrin, 1932 ;
Henri Gouhier, La jeunesse d'Auguste Comte et la formation du positivisme, tome 2 : Saint-Simon jusqu'a la restauration, Vrin;
Henri Gouhier, La jeunesse d'Auguste Comte et la formation du positivisme, tome 3 : Auguste Comte et Saint-Simon, Vrin, 1941 ;
Henri Gouhier, Oeuvres choisies avec introduction et notes, Aubier, 1941 ;
Georges Canguilhem, << Histoire des religions et histoire des sciences dans la theorie du fetichisme chez Auguste Comte >>, Etudes d'histoire et de philosophie des sciences, Vrin, 1968 ;
H.S. Jones, ed., Comte: Early Political Writings, Cambridge University Press, 1998;
Angele Kremer-Marietti, Auguste Comte et la theorie sociale du positivisme, Seghers, 1972 ;
Angele Kremer-Marietti, Auguste Comte, la science sociale, Gallimard, 1972 ;
Angele Kremer-Marietti, Le projet anthropologique d'Auguste Comte, SEDES, 1980, reedition L'Harmattan, 1999 ;
Angele Kremer-Marietti, L'anthropologie positiviste d'Auguste Comte, Lib. Honore Champion, 1980 ;
Angele Kremer-Marietti, Entre le signe et l'histoire. L'anthropologie positiviste d'Auguste Comte, Klincksieck, 1982, reedition L'Harmattan,1999 ;
Angele Kremer-Marietti, Le positivisme, Coll."Que sais-je?", PUF, 1982 ;
Angele Kremer-Marietti, Le concept de science positive. Ses tenants et ses aboutissants dans les structures anthropologiques du positivisme, Meridiens Klincksieck, 1983 ;
Angele Kremer-Marietti, Le positivisme d'Auguste Comte, L'Harmattan, 2006 ;
Angele Kremer-Marietti, Auguste Comte et la science politique, in Auguste Comte, Plan des travaux scientifiques necessaires pour reorganiserla societe, L'Harmattan, 2001;
Angele Kremer-Marietti, Auguste Comte et l'histoire generale, in Auguste Comte, Sommaire appreciation de l'ensemble du passe moderne, L'Harmattan, 2006 ;
Angele Kremer-Marietti, Auguste Comte et la science politique, L'Harmattan, 2007;
Angele Kremer-Marietti, Le kaleidoscope epistemologique d'Auguste Comte. Sentiments Images Signes, L'Harmattan, 2007;
Realino Marra, La proprieta in Auguste Comte. Dall'ordine fisico alla circolazione morale della ricchezza, in <<Sociologia del diritto>>, XII-2, 1985, pp. 21-53;
Pierre Macherey, Comte. La philosophie et les sciences, PUF, 1989 ;
Thomas Meaney, The Religion of Science and Its High Priest[1], The New York Review of Books, 2012
Jacques Muglioni, Auguste Comte: un philosophe pour notre temps, Kime, Paris, 1995
Gertrud Lenzer, Auguste Comte: Essential Writings (1975), New York Harper, Paperback, 1997 ;
Raquel Capurro, Le positivisme est un culte des morts: Auguste Comte, Epel, 1999 (traduit en francais en 2001) : l'etude la plus recente sur la vie d'Auguste Comte, la vision sans complaisance d'une psychanalyste de l'ecole de Lacan ;
Auguste Comte, Positive Philosophy of Auguste Comte (1855), translated by Harriet Martineau, Kessinger Publishing, Paperback, 2003 ; Also available from the McMaster Archive for the History of Economic Thought, Volume One Volume Two Volume Three
Pierre Laffitte (1823-1903): Autour d'un centenaire, in Revue des Sciences et des Techniques en perspective, 2eme serie, vol. 8, ndeg2, 2004, Brepols Publishers, 2005 ;
Zeineb Ben Said Cherni, Auguste Comte, posterite epistemologique et ralliement des nations, L'Harmattan, 2005 ;
Mary Pickering, Auguste Comte: An Intellectual Biography, Cambridge University Press (1993), Paperback, 2006 ;
Wolf Lepenies, Auguste Comte: die Macht der Zeichen, Carl Hanser, Munchen, 2010;
Oseias Faustino Valentim, O Brasil e o Positivismo, Publit, Rio de Janeiro, 2010. ISBN 978-85-7773-331-6.


== See also ==

Listing of the work of Jean Antoine Injalbert-French sculptor Sculptor Auguste Comte memorial


== Notes ==


== External links ==
Works by Auguste Comte at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Auguste Comte at Internet Archive
Auguste Comte: Stanford Encyclopaedia of Philosophy
Review materials for studying Auguste Comte
J.H. Bridges, The Seven New Thoughts of the Positive Polity 1915
Auguste Comte quotes
Auguste Comte at Find a Grave
Positivist Church of Brazil
The Three Cs and the Notion of Progress: Copernicus, Condorcet, Comte by Caspar J M Hewett
Sociological theory basing on theory of Comte
The positive philosophy, Auguste Comte / freely translated and selected by Harriet Martineau, Cornell University Library Historical Monographs Collection - downloadable version. {Reprinted by} Cornell University Library Digital Collections
Some selections from first lecture of Course of Positive Philosophy
Auguste Comte - High Priest of Positivism by Caspar Hewett
Maison d'Auguste Comte