Baldr (also Balder, Baldur) is a god of light and purity in Norse mythology, and a son of the god Odin and the goddess Frigg. He has numerous brothers, such as Thor and Vali.
In the 12th century, Danish accounts by Saxo Grammaticus and other Danish Latin chroniclers recorded a euhemerized account of his story. Compiled in Iceland in the 13th century, but based on much older Old Norse poetry, the Poetic Edda and the Prose Edda contain numerous references to the death of Baldr as both a great tragedy to the AEsir and a harbinger of Ragnarok.
According to Gylfaginning, a book of Snorri Sturluson's Prose Edda, Baldr's wife is Nanna and their son is Forseti. In Gylfaginning, Snorri relates that Baldr had the greatest ship ever built, named Hringhorni, and that there is no place more beautiful than his hall, Breidablik.


== Name ==
Jacob Grimm in his Teutonic Mythology (ch. 11) identifies Old Norse Baldr with the Old High German Baldere (2nd Merseburg Charm, Thuringia), Palter (theonym, Bavaria), Paltar (personal name) and with Old English bealdor, baldor "lord, prince, king" (used always with a genitive plural, as in gumena baldor "lord of men", wigena baldor "lord of warriors", et cetera). Old Norse shows this usage of the word as an honorific in a few cases, as in baldur i brynju (Saem. 272b) and herbaldr (Saem. 218b), both epithets of heroes in general.
Grimm traces the etymology of the name to *balthaz, whence Gothic balths, Old English bald, Old High German pald, all meaning "white, good".
But the interpretation of Baldr as "the brave god" may be secondary. Baltic (cf. Lithuanian baltas, Latvian balts) has a word meaning "the white, the good", and Grimm speculates that the name may originate as a Baltic loan into Proto-Germanic. In continental Saxon and Anglo-Saxon tradition, the son of Odin is called not Bealdor but Baldag (Sax.) and Baeldaeg, Beldeg (AS.), which shows association with "day", possibly with Day personified as a deity which, Grimm points out, would agree with the meaning "shining one, white one, a god" derived from the meaning of Baltic baltas, further adducing Slavic Belobog and German Berhta.


== Attestations ==


=== Merseburg Incantation ===
One of the two Merseburg Incantations names Baldere, but also mentions a figure named Phol, considered to be a byname for Baldr (as in Scandinavian Falr, Fjalarr; (in Saxo) Balderus : Fjallerus).


=== Poetic Edda ===

In the Poetic Edda the tale of Baldr's death is referred to rather than recounted at length. Among the visions which the Volva sees and describes in the prophecy known as the Voluspa is one of the fatal mistletoe, the birth of Vali and the weeping of Frigg (stanzas 31-33). Yet looking far into the future the Volva sees a brighter vision of a new world, when both Hodr and Baldr will come back (stanza 62). The Eddic poem Baldr's Dreams mentions that Baldr has bad dreams which the gods then discuss. Odin rides to Hel and awakens a seeress, who tells him Hodr will kill Baldr but Vali will avenge him (stanzas 9, 11).


=== Prose Edda ===

In Gylfaginning, Baldur is described as follows:
Apart from this description Baldr is known primarily for the story of his death. His death is seen as the first in the chain of events which will ultimately lead to the destruction of the gods at Ragnarok. Baldr will be reborn in the new world, according to Voluspa.
He had a dream of his own death and his mother had the same dreams. Since dreams were usually prophetic, this depressed him, so his mother Frigg made every object in every realm vow never to hurt Baldr. All objects made this vow except mistletoe. Frigg had thought it too young to swear--a detail which has traditionally been explained with the idea that it was too unimportant and unthreatening to bother asking it to make the vow, but which Merrill Kaplan has instead argued echoes that fact that young people were not eligible to swear legal oaths, which could make them a threat later in life.

When Loki, the mischief-maker, heard of this, he made a magical spear from this plant (in some later versions, an arrow). He hurried to the place where the gods were indulging in their new pastime of hurling objects at Baldr, which would bounce off without harming him. Loki gave the spear to Baldr's brother, the blind god Hodr, who then inadvertently killed his brother with it (other versions suggest that Loki guided the arrow himself). For this act, Odin and the giantess Rindr gave birth to Vali who grew to adulthood within a day and slew Hodr.
Baldr was ceremonially burnt upon his ship, Hringhorni, the largest of all ships. As he was carried to the ship, Odin whispered in his ear. The question of what he said was to be a key riddle asked by Odin (in disguise) of the giant Vafthrudnir (and which was, of course, unanswerable) in the poem Vafthrudnismal. The riddle also appears in the riddles of Gestumblindi in Hervarar saga.
The dwarf Litr was kicked by Thor into the funeral fire and burnt alive. Nanna, Baldr's wife, also threw herself on the funeral fire to await Ragnarok when she would be reunited with her husband (alternatively, she died of grief). Baldr's horse with all its trappings was also burned on the pyre. The ship was set to sea by Hyrrokin, a giantess, who came riding on a wolf and gave the ship such a push that fire flashed from the rollers and all the earth shook.
Upon Frigg's entreaties, delivered through the messenger Hermod, Hel promised to release Baldr from the underworld if all objects alive and dead would weep for him. All did, except a giantess, Thokk often presumed to be the god Loki in disguise, who refused to mourn the slain god. Thus Baldr had to remain in the underworld, not to emerge until after Ragnarok, when he and his brother Hodr would be reconciled and rule the new earth together with Thor's sons.


=== Gesta Danorum ===
Writing at about the end of the 12th century, the Danish historian Saxo Grammaticus tells the story of Baldr (recorded as Balderus) in a form which professes to be historical. According to him, Balderus and Hotherus were rival suitors for the hand of Nanna, daughter of Gewar, King of Norway. Balderus was a demigod and common steel could not wound his sacred body. The two rivals encountered each other in a terrific battle. Though Odin and Thor and the rest of the gods fought for Balderus, he was defeated and fled away, and Hotherus married the princess.
Nevertheless Balderus took heart of grace and again met Hotherus in a stricken field. But he fared even worse than before. Hotherus dealt him a deadly wound with a magic sword, named Mistletoe, which he had received from Miming, the satyr of the woods; after lingering three days in pain Balderus died of his injury and was buried with royal honours in a barrow.


=== Chronicon Lethrense and Annales Lundenses ===
There are also two lesser known Danish Latin chronicles, the Chronicon Lethrense and the Annales Lundenses of which the latter is included in the former. These two sources provide a second euhemerized account of Hodr's slaying of Baldr.
It relates that Hother was the king of the Saxons and son of Hothbrod and the daughter of Hadding. Hother first slew Othen's (i.e. Odin) son Balder in battle and then chased Othen and Thor. Finally, Othen's son Both killed Hother. Hother, Balder, Othen and Thor were incorrectly considered to be gods.


=== Utrecht Inscription ===
A Latin votive inscription from Utrecht, from the 3rd or 4th century C.E., has been theorized as containing the dative form Baldruo, pointing to a Latin nominative singular *Baldruus, which some have identified with the Norse/Germanic god, although both the reading and this interpretation have been questioned.


== Eponyms ==


=== Plants ===

As referenced in Gylfaginning, in Sweden and Norway, the scentless mayweed (Matricaria perforata) and the similar sea mayweed (Matricaria maritima) are both called baldursbra "Balder's brow" and regionally in northern England (baldeyebrow). In Iceland only the former is found. In Germany lily-of-the-valley is known as weisser Baldrian; variations using or influenced by reflexes of Phol include Faltrian (upper Austria), Villumfallum (Salzburg), and Fildron or Faldron (Tyrol).


=== Toponyms ===
There are a few old place names in Scandinavia that contain the name Baldr. The most certain and notable one is the (former) parish name Balleshol in Hedmark county, Norway: "a Balldrshole" 1356 (where the last element is holl m "mound; small hill"). Others may be (in Norse forms) Baldrsberg in Vestfold county, Baldrsheimr in Hordaland county Baldrsnes in Sor-Trondelag county -- and (very uncertain) the Balsfjorden fjord and Balsfjord municipality in Troms county.
In Copenhagen, there is also a Baldersgade, or "Balder's Street." A street in downtown Reykjavik is called Baldursgata (Baldur's Street).
In Belgium, the name Balder is also used in dialect for a village called Berlaar and in another village (Tielen), the Balderij is a street and a swampy area next to it.
In Yorkshire there are Baldersby and Pule Hill (from Phol).
In Nottinghamshire there is a village called Balderton, originally a vineyard. This is also mentioned also in the Doomsday book.
Baldur, Manitoba is a village in southern Manitoba, Canada. About 1890, Sigurdur Christopherson could not find a suitable flower in the district to name the town after, so he suggested the name of a beautiful Nordic God, namely Baldur, son of Odin.


== In popular culture ==
Baldr is one of the incarnated gods in the New Zealand comedy/drama The Almighty Johnsons. The part of "Olaf Johnson/Baldr" is played by Ben Barrington.
Baldr appears in the Supernatural episode "Hammer of the Gods" played by Adam Croasdell.
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow's poem "Tegner's Drapa" dealt with Baldr's death.
Shadow Moon, the main character in American Gods by Neil Gaiman, is eventually revealed in a related short story, "Monarch of the Glen" to be the god Baldr.
Daudi Baldrs (English: "Baldr's Death" or "The Death of Baldr") is the fifth album by the Norwegian band Burzum.
Baldur is the debut album of Icelandic Viking metal band Skalmold.
In the Japanese PSP game, Kamigami no Asobi: Ludere Deorum (translated as Mischief of the Gods), Balder is one of the 8 main characters in the game where the player will take on the role of the heroine and choose one of the male characters as her love interest. An anime television series adaption of the game was aired on April 2014.
Baldr is a major character in Libba Bray's novel Going Bovine.
In Sir Walter Scott's historical novel Ivanhoe, Cedric the Saxon, the protagonist's father, has a dog named Balder.
In the Xbox 360 game Too Human, Baldr is the playable protagonist.
In the DS game Shin Megami Tensei: Devil Survivor, he makes an appearance under the name Beldr as a competitor in the War of Bel.


== See also ==
List of Germanic deities


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Anatoly Liberman, "Some Controversial Aspects of the Myth of Baldr," Alvissmal 11 (2004): 17-54.
John Lindow, Murder and Vengeance Among the Gods: Baldr in Scandinavian Mythology. Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia (1997), ISBN 951-41-0809-4.
Jacob Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie (1835), chapter 11 "Paltar".