Savinien de Cyrano de Bergerac (6 March 1619 - 28 July 1655) was a French novelist, playwright, epistolarian and duelist.
A bold and innovative author, his work was part of the libertine literature of the first half of the seventeenth century. Today he is best known as the inspiration for Edmond Rostand's most famous drama Cyrano de Bergerac which, although it includes elements of his life, also contains invention and myth.
Since the 1970s, there has been a resurgence in the study of Cyrano, demonstrated in the abundance of theses, essays, articles and biographies published in France and elsewhere in recent decades.


== Life ==


=== Sources ===
Cyrano's short life is poorly documented. Certain significant chapters of his life are only known from the Preface to the Histoire Comique par Monsieur de Cyrano Bergerac, Contenant les Estats & Empires de la Lune (Comical History of the States and Empires of the Moon) published in 1657, 20 months after his death. Without Henri Le Bret, who wrote the biographical information, his country childhood, his military engagement, the injuries it caused, his prowess as a swordsman, the circumstances of his death and his supposed final conversion would remain unknown.
Since 1862 when Auguste Jal revealed that the "Lord of Bergerac" was Parisian and not Gascon, research in parish registries and notarial records by a small number of researchers,           in particular Madeleine Alcover of Rice University, has allowed the public to know more about his genealogy, his family, his home in Paris and those of some of his friends, but has revealed no new documents that support or refute the essentials of Le Bret's account or fill the gaps in his narrative. 


=== Family ===
Savinien II de Cyrano was the son of Abel I de Cyrano, lord of Mauvieres, (156?-1648), counsel (avocat) of the Parliament of Paris, and of Esperance Bellanger (1586-164?), "daughter of deceased nobleman Estienne Bellanger, Counsellor of the King and Treasurer of his Finances".


==== Ancestors ====

His paternal grandfather, Savinien I de Cyrano (15??-1590), was probably born into a notable family from Sens in Burgundy. Documents describe him in turn as a "merchant and burgher of Paris" (<< marchand et bourgeois de Paris >> 20 May 1555), "(sea-)fish merchant to the King" (<< vendeur de poisson de mer pour le Roy >>) in several other documents in following years, and finally "Royal counsellor" (<< conseiller du Roi, maison et couronne de France >> 7 April 1573). In Paris, on 9 April 1551, he married Anne Le Maire, daughter of Estienne Le Maire and Perrette Cardon, who died in 1616. They are known to have had four children: Abel (the writer's father), Samuel (15??-1646), Pierre (15??-1626) and Anne (15??-1652).
Of his maternal grandfather, Estienne Bellanger, "Financial Controller of the Parisian general revenue" (<< controleur des finances en la recette generale de Paris >>), and of his background, we know almost nothing. We know more about his wife, Catherine Millet, whose father, Guillaume II Millet, Lord of Caves, was secretary of the King's finances, and whose grandfather, Guillaume I Millet (149?-1563), qualified in medicine in 1518, was doctor to three kings in succession (Francis I, Henry II and Francis II). He married Catherine Valeton, daughter of a property tax collector from Nantes, Audebert Valeton, who, accused of involvement in the Affair of the Placards, was "burned alive on wood taken from his house"  on 21 January 1535 at the crossroads of la Croix du Trahoir (the intersection of the Rue de l'Arbre-Sec and the Rue Saint-Honore), in front of the Pavillon des singes, where Moliere lived almost a century later.


==== Parents ====
Esperance Bellanger and Abel I de Cyrano were married on 3 September 1612 at the church of St-Gervais-et-St-Protais. She was at least twenty-six years old; he was about forty-five. Their marriage contract, signed the previous 12 July at the office of Master Denis Feydeau, counsellor, secretary and king's notary, second cousin of the bride, was only published in the year 2000 by Madeleine Alcover, who minutely traces the fate of the witnesses (and more particularly their links with pious milieus) and notes that many of them "had entered the worlds of high finance, the noblesse de robe, of the aristocracy (including the Court) and even the noblesse d'epee".


==== His father's library ====
In 1911 Jean Lemoine made known the inventory of Abel de Cyrano's worldly goods. His library, relatively poorly stocked (126 volumes), testifies to his schooling as a jurist and to an open curiosity: a taste for languages and ancient literature, the great humanists of the Renaissance (Erasmus, Rabelais, Juan Luis Vives), knowledge of Italian, interest in the sciences. On the religious side, one notices the presence of two Bibles, of an Italian New Testament and the Prayers of St. Basil in Greek, but no pious works. There is no object of that kind (engraving, painting, statue, crucifix) amongst the other inventoried items, but in contrast "twelve small paintings of portraits of gods and goddesses" and "four wax figures: one of Venus and Cupid, another of a woman pulling a thorn, one of a flageolet player and one of an ashamed nude woman". Finally, one notes the presence of several well-known protestants: the Discours politiques et militaires ("Political and Military Discourse") of Francois de la Noue, two volumes of George Buchanan, the Dialectique of Pierre de La Ramee, the Alphabet de plusieurs sortes de lettres ("Alphabet of different kinds of letters") by master calligrapher Pierre Hamon and La Verite de la religion chretienne ("The Truth of the Christian Religion") by Philippe Duplessis-Mornay, whose presence confirms that Abel spent his younger years in Huguenot surroundings.


==== Siblings ====
Esperance and Abel I had at least six children:
Denis, brought to the baptismal font at the church of Saint-Eustache on 31 March 1614 by Anne Le Maire, his grandmother, and Denis Feydeau, financier. He studied Theology at the Sorbonne and died in the 1640s;
Antoine, brought to the baptismal font of Saint-Eustache on 11 February 1616 by his paternal aunt, Anne Cyrano, and a godfather who is not named in the baptismal register discovered by Auguste Jal, but who might have been the financier Antoine Feydeau (1573-1628), younger brother of Denis. Died at a young age;
Honore, brought to the baptismal font of Saint-Eustache on 3 July 1617 by Honore Barentin, tresorier des parties casuelles, and an unnamed godmother. Died at a young age;
Savinien II (1619-1655), the subject of this article;
Abel II, born around 1624, who took the title "Lord of Mauvieres" after the death of his father in 1648;
Catherine, whose date of birth is not known and who died in the early years of the following century, having become a nun at the convent of the Filles de la Croix (de Paris) ("Daughters of the Cross (Paris)") in the Rue de Charonne in 1641, under the name Sister Catherine de Sainte-Hyacinthe.


=== Childhood and adolescence ===


==== Baptism and godparents ====
The historian Auguste Jal discovered the baptism of the (then) supposed Gascon in the 1860s:

Finally, after long exertion, I knew that Abel Cyrano had left the neighbourhood of Saint-Eustache for that of Saint-Sauveur, and that Esperance Bellanger had given birth in this new dwelling to a boy whose baptismal record is as follows: "The sixth of March one thousand six hundred and nineteen, Savinien, son of Abel de Cyrano, squire, Lord of Mauvieres, and of the lady Esperance Bellenger (sic), the godfather, nobleman Antoine Fanny, King's Counsellor and Auditor in his Court of Finances, of this parish, the godmother the lady Marie Fedeau (sic), wife of nobleman Master Louis Perrot, Counsellor and Secretary to the King, Household and Crown of France, of the parish of Saint-Germain-l'Auxerrois". This son of Abel de Cyrano who was not given the name of his godfather, Antoine, because he had a brother of that name, born in 1616, but was named Savinien in memory of his grandfather, who could doubt that this was the Savinien Cyrano who was born, according to the biographers, at the chateau of Bergerac in or around 1620?

Thus Esperance Bellanger was thirty-three years old, Abel de Cyrano around fifty-two.
The surname Fanny appears nowhere in the very complete study of La Chambre des comptes de Paris ("Court of Finances of Paris") published by Count H. Coustant d'Yanville in 1875 (or for that matter in any other French document of the 17th century). In 1898, Viscount Oscar de Poli suggested that it must have been a transcription error and proposed reading it as Lamy. An Antoine Lamy had actually been accepted as an auditor of finances on 2 September 1602, a year before Pierre de Maupeou, Esperance Bellanger's cousin and son-in-law of Denis Feydeau who was a witness to the marriage of Savinien's parents in 1612. His wife, Catherine Vigor, associate of Vincent de Paul, would become President of the Confrerie de la Charite de Gentilly ("Charitable Fellowship of Gentilly") where the couple set up a mission in 1634. She could well be the godmother of Catherine de Cyrano.
Marie Feydeau, cosponsor with Antoine Lamy, was the sister of Denis and Antoine Feydeau and the wife of Louis (or Loys) Perrot (15??-1625), who, apart from his titles of "King's Counsellor and Secretary", also had that of "King's Interpreter of Foreign Languages".


==== Mauvieres and Bergerac ====

In 1622, Abel de Cyrano left Paris with his family and went to settle on his lands at Mauvieres and Bergerac in the Vallee de Chevreuse, which had come to him in part after the death of his mother in 1616.
His possessions, situated on the banks of the Yvette River in the parish of Saint-Forget, had been purchased by Savinien I de Cyrano forty years earlier from Thomas de Fortboys, who had bought them himself in 1576 from Lord Dauphin de Bergerac (or Bergerat), whose ancestors had possessed them for more than a century.
When Savinien I de Cyrano acquired it, the domain of Mauvieres consisted of "a habitable mansion...with a lower room, a cellar beneath, kitchen, pantry, an upper chamber, granaries, stables, barn, portal, all roofed with tiles, with courtyard, walled dovecote; mill, enclosed plot, garden and fishpond, the right of middle and low justice...".
The estate of Bergerac, which adjoined Mauvieres, "comprised a house with portal, courtyard, barn, hovel and garden, being an acre or thereabouts, plus forty-six and a half acres, of which thirty-six and a half were farmland and ten woodland, with the rights of middle and low justice".


==== Country schooling ====

It was in this rustic setting that the child grew up and in the neighbouring parish he learnt to read and write. His friend Le Bret recalls:

The education that we had together with a good country priest who took in boarders, made us friends from our most tender youth, and I remember the aversion he had from that time for one who seemed to him a shadow of Sidias, because, in the thoughts which that man could somewhat grasp, he believed him incapable of teaching him anything; so that he paid so little attention to his lessons and his corrections that his father, who was a fine old gentlemen, fairly unconcerned for his children's education and overly credulous of this one's complaints, removed him [from the school] a little too suddenly and, without considering if his son would be better off elsewhere, he sent him to that city [Paris] where he left him, until the age of nineteen years, to his own devices.


==== Parisian adolescence ====
It is unknown at what age Savinien arrived in Paris. He may have been accommodated by his uncle Samuel de Cyrano in a large family residence in the Rue des Prouvaires, where his parents had lived up until 1618. In this theory, it was there that he was introduced to his cousin Pierre, with whom, according to Le Bret, he would build a lasting friendship.

He continued his secondary studies at an academy which remains unknown. It has long been maintained that he attended the College de Beauvais where the action of the comedy Le pedant joue takes place and whose principal, Jean Grangier would inspire the character of Granger, the pedant of Le pedant joue, but his presence in June 1641 as a student of rhetoric at the College de Lisieux (see below), has encouraged more recent historians to revise that opinion.
In 1636, his father sold Mauvieres and Bergerac to Antoine Balestrier, Lord of Arbalestre, and returned to Paris to live with his family in "a modest dwelling at the top of the great Rue du Faubourg Saint-Jacques close to the Crossing" (parish of Saint-Jacques and Saint-Philippe), a short distance from the College de Lisieux. But there is no certainty that Savinien went to live with them.


==== A slippery slope ====
Le Bret continues his story:

That age when nature is most easily corrupted, and that great liberty he had to only do that which seemed good to him, brought him to a dangerous weakness (penchant), which I dare say I stopped...

Historians and biographers do not agree on this penchant which threatened to corrupt Cyrano's nature. As an example of the romantic imagination of some biographers, we can cite these lines of Frederic Lachevre:

Against an embittered and discontented father, Cyrano promptly forgot the way to his father's house. Soon he was counted among the gluttons and hearty drinkers of the best inns, with them he gave himself up to jokes of questionable taste, usually following prolonged libations...He also picked up the deplorable habit of gambling. This kind of life could not continue indefinitely, especially since Abel de Cyrano had become completely deaf to his son's repeated requests for funds.

Forty years later, two excellent editors added to the realism and local colour:

Since nothing binds Cyrano to the humble lodgings of the Rue du Faubourg Saint-Jacques to which the uncertainties of fate condemned his family, he gives himself over entirely to Paris, to its streets and, according to the words of one of his close friends, "to its warts" (a ses verrues). He drinks, diligently frequents the Rue Glatigny, says Val d'amour, because of the women who sell pleasure there, gambles, roams the sleeping city to frighten the bourgeois or forge signs, provokes the watch, gets into debt and links himself with that literary Bohemia which centered around Tristan L'Hermite and Saint-Amant and cultivated the memory of Theophile and his impious lyricism.

In his voluminous biography of Charles Coypeau d'Assoucy, Jean-Luc Hennig suggests that the poet-musician had begun around 1636 (at thirty-one) a homosexual relationship with Cyrano, then seventeen. In support of this hypothesis, he notes that both had families from Sens, a lawyer father and religious brothers and sisters, that the elder only liked youths and in regard to the women of Montpellier who accused him in 1656 of neglecting them, he wrote that "all of that has no more foundation than their fanciful imagination, already concerned, which had taught them the long-time habits [that he] had had with C[hapelle], late D[e] B[ergerac] and late C."
Cyrano's homosexuality, was first explicitly hypothesised by Jacques Prevot in 1978,.


== Life and works ==
He was the son of Abel de Cyrano, lord of Mauvieres and Bergerac, and Esperance Bellanger. He received his first education from a country priest, and had for a fellow pupil his friend and future biographer Henri Lebret. He then proceeded to Paris, and the heart of the Latin Quarter, to the college de Dormans-Beauvais, where he had as master Jean Grangier, whom he afterwards ridiculed in his comedy Le Pedant joue (The Pedant Tricked) of 1654. At the age of nineteen, he entered a corps of the guards, serving in the campaigns of 1639 and 1640.
One author, Ishbel Addyman, varies from other biographers and claims that he was not a Gascon aristocrat, but a descendant of a Sardinian fishmonger and that the Bergerac appellation stemmed from a small estate near Paris where he was born, and not in Gascony, and that he may have suffered tertiary syphilis. She also claims that he may likely have been homosexual and around 1640 became the lover of Charles Coypeau d'Assoucy, a writer and musician, until around 1653, when they became engaged in a bitter rivalry. This led to Bergerac sending d'Assoucy death threats that compelled him to leave Paris. The quarrel extended to a series of satirical texts by both men. Bergerac wrote Contre Soucidas (an anagram of his enemy's name) and Contre un ingrat (Against an ingrate), while D'Assoucy counterattacked with Le Combat de Cyrano de Bergerac avec le singe de Brioche, au bout du Pont-Neuf (The battle of Cyrano de Bergerac with the monkey of Brioche, at the end of the Pont-Neuf). He also associated with Theophile de Viau, the French poet and libertine.
He is said to have left the military and returned to Paris to pursue literature, producing tragedies cast in the orthodox classical mode.
The model for the Roxane character of the Rostand play was Bergerac's cousin, who lived with his sister, Catherine de Bergerac, at the Convent of the Daughter of the Cross. As in the play, Bergerac did fight at the siege of Arras (1640), a battle of the Thirty Years' War between French and Spanish forces in France (though this was not the more famous final Battle of Arras, fought fourteen years later). One of his confreres in the battle was the Baron Christian of Neuvillette, who married Cyrano's cousin. However, the plotline of Rostand's play, Cyrano de Bergerac, involving Roxane and Christian is entirely fictional.
Cyrano was a pupil of French polymath Pierre Gassendi, a canon of the Catholic Church who tried to reconcile Epicurean atomism with Christianity.

Cyrano de Bergerac's works L'Autre Monde: ou les Etats et Empires de la Lune (Comical History of the States and Empires of the Moon) (published posthumously, 1657) and Les Etats et Empires du Soleil (The States and Empires of the Sun) (1662) are classics of early modern science fiction. In the former, Cyrano travels to the moon using rockets powered by firecrackers and meets the inhabitants. The moon-men have four legs, musical voices, and firearms that shoot game and cook it.
His mixture of science and romance in the last two works furnished a model for many subsequent writers, among them Jonathan Swift, Edgar Allan Poe and probably Voltaire. Corneille and Moliere freely borrowed ideas from Le Pedant joue.


=== Death ===
The play suggests that he was injured by a falling wooden beam in 1654 while entering the house of his patron, the Duc D'Arpajon. However the academic and editor of Cyrano's works, Madeleine Alcover, uncovered a contemporary text which suggests an attack on the Duke's carriage in which a member of his household was injured. It is as yet inconclusive as to whether or not his death was a result of the injury, or an unspecified disease. He died over a year later on July 28, 1655, aged 36, at the house of his cousin, Pierre De Cyrano, in Sannois. He was buried in a church in Sannois. However there is strong evidence to support the theory that his death was a result of a botched assassination attempt as well as further damage to his health caused by a period of confinement in a private asylum, orchestrated by his enemies, who succeeded in enlisting the help of his own brother Abel de Cyrano.


== In fiction ==


=== Rostand ===
In 1897, the French poet Edmond Rostand published a play, Cyrano de Bergerac, on the subject of Cyrano's life. This play, which became Rostand's most successful work, revolves around Cyrano's love for the beautiful Roxane, whom he is obliged to woo on behalf of a more conventionally handsome but less articulate friend, Christian de Neuvillette.
The play has been made into operas and adapted for cinema several times and reworked in other literary forms and as a ballet.


=== Other authors ===
The Adventures of Cyrano De Bergerac, by Louis Gallet, was published in English by Jarrolds Publishers (London) in 1900. It bears no resemblance to Rostand's play apart from the characteristics of the de Bergerac character.
Cyrano also appears as one of the main characters of the Riverworld series of books by Philip Jose Farmer.


=== Original editions ===
Cyrano de Bergerac (1654). La Mort d'Agrippine, tragedie, par Mr de Cyrano Bergerac [The Death of Agrippina, tragedy, by Mr de Cyrano Bergerac] (in French). Paris: Charles de Sercy. Retrieved 4 April 2015. 
Cyrano de Bergerac (1654). Les OEuvres diverses de Mr de Cyrano Bergerac [The various works of Mr de Cyrano Bergerac] (in French). Paris: Charles de Sercy. Retrieved 4 April 2015. 
Cyrano de Bergerac (1657). Histoire comique par Monsieur de Cyrano Bergerac contenant les Estats & Empires de la Lune [Comical History by Mr de Cyrano Bergerac including The States & Empires of the Moon] (in French). Paris: Charles de Sercy. Retrieved 4 April 2015. 
Cyrano de Bergerac (1662). Les Nouvelles oeuvres de Monsieur de Cyrano Bergerac. Contenant l'Histoire comique des Estats et Empires du Soleil, plusieurs lettres et autres pieces divertissantes [The New Works of Mr de Cyrano Bergerac. Including The Comical History of the States and Empires of the Sun, several letters and other diverting pieces] (in French). Paris: Charles de Sercy. Retrieved 4 April 2015. 
Cyrano de Bergerac (1649). Le Ministre d'Estat flambe en vers burlesques [The Minister of State roasted in farcical verse] (in French). Paris: [s.n.] Retrieved 4 April 2015. 
Cyrano de Bergerac (1709). Les oeuvres diverses de M. Cyrano de Bergerac [The varied works of Mr. Cyrano de Bergerac] (in French) 1. Amsterdam: J. Desbordes. Retrieved 4 April 2015. 
Cyrano de Bergerac (1709). Les oeuvres diverses de M. Cyrano de Bergerac [The varied works of Mr. Cyrano de Bergerac] (in French) 2. Amsterdam: J. Desbordes. Retrieved 4 April 2015. 


=== Translations ===
Cyrano de Bergerac (1658). Satyrical Characters, and handsome Descriptions in letters, written to severall Persons of Quality, by Monsieur De Cyrano Bergerac. Translated from the French by a Person of Honour. London: Henry Herringman. 
Cyrano de Bergerac (1659). SELENARKhIA, or, The government of the world in the moon : a comical history / written by that famous wit and caveleer of France, Monsieur Cyrano Bergerac ; and done into English by Tho. St Serf, Gent. Translated by Sir Thomas St. Serf (Sir Thomas Sydserff). London: printed by J. Cottrel, and are to be sold by Hum. Robinson. 
Cyrano de Bergerac (1687). The Comical History of the States and Empires of the Worlds of the Sun and Moon. Written in French by Cyrano Bergerac. And newly Englished by A. Lowell, A.M. Translated by Archibald Lovell. London: Henry Rhodes. 

Cyrano de Bergerac (1889). A Voyage to the Moon. Translated by Archibald Lovell, Edited by Curtis Hidden Page. New York: Doubleday and McClure Co. Retrieved 5 April 2015.  Additional copies: 1 2 3

Cyrano de Bergerac (1753). A voyage to the moon : with some account of the solar world. A comical romance. Done from the French of M. Cyrano de Bergerac. By Mr. Derrick. Translated by Samuel Derrick. London: Printed for P. Vaillant, R. Griffiths, and G. Woodfall. 
Cyrano de Bergerac; Friendly, Jonathon (1756). The agreement. A satyrical and facetious dream. To which is annexed, the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, &c. London: [s.n.]        (The dream is a translation of D'un songe, first published in Lettres diverses.)
Cyrano de Bergerac (1923). Voyages to the moon and the sun. Translated by Richard Aldington. London/New York: Routledge & Sons Ltd/E.P. Dutton & Co. 


=== Critical editions ===
Cyrano de Bergerac (1858). Histoire comique des Etats et empires de la Lune et du Soleil [Comical History of the States and Empires of the Moon and the Sun] (in French). Edited by Paul Lacroix Jacob with notes. Paris: Adolphe Delahays. Retrieved 5 April 2015. 
Cyrano de Bergerac (1858). OEuvres comiques, galantes et litteraires [Comical, gallant and literary works] (in French). Edited by Paul Lacroix Jacob with notes. Paris: Adolphe Delahays. Retrieved 5 April 2015. 
Lachevre, Frederic (1921). Les OEuvres libertines de Cyrano de Bergerac, Parisien (1619-1655), precedees d'une notice biographique. Tome premier [The Libertine Works of Cyrano de Bergerac, Parisian (1619-1655), preceded by a biographical notice. Volume one] (in French). Paris: Librairie ancienne Honore Champion. Retrieved 5 April 2015. 

L'Autre monde: I. Les Estats et Empires de la Lune (texte integral, publie pour la premiere fois, d'apres les manuscrits de Paris et de Munich, avec les variantes de l'imprime de 1657). -- II. Les Estats et Empires du Soleil (d'apres l'edition originale de 1662)
The Other World: I. The States and Empires of the Moon (full text published for the first time following the Paris and Munich manuscripts including variations from the 1657 edition). -- II. The States and Empires of the Sun (following the original edition of 1662)

Lachevre, Frederic (1921). Les OEuvres libertines de Cyrano de Bergerac, Parisien (1619-1655), precedees d'une notice biographique. Tome second [The Libertine Works of Cyrano de Bergerac, Parisian (1619-1655), preceded by a biographical notice. Volume two] (in French). Paris: Librairie ancienne Honore Champion. Retrieved 5 April 2015. 

Le Pedant joue, comedie, texte du Ms. de la Bibl. nat., avec les variantes de l'imprime de 1654. -- La Mort d'Agrippine, tragedie. -- Les Lettres, texte du Ms. de la Bibl. nat. avec les var. de 1654. -- Les Mazarinades: Le Ministre d'Etat flambe; Le Gazettier des-interesse, etc. -- Les Entretiens pointus. -- Appendice: Le Sermon du cure de Colignac, etc...
The Pedant tricked, comedy, text from Mss. in the National Library with variations from the edition of 1654. -- The Death of Agrippina, tragedy. -- The Letters, text from Mss. in the National Library with variations from 1654 edition. -- The Mazarinades: The Minister of State roasted; The disinterested Gazetteer, etc. -- The sharp interviews. -- Appendix: The sermon of the curate of Colignac, etc...

Cyrano de Bergerac (1962). Histoire comique des Etat et empire de la Lune et du Soleil [Comical History of the States and Empires of the Moon and the Sun] (in French). Edited by Claude Mettra and Jean Suyeux. Paris: Jean-Jacques Pauvert et Club des Libraires de France. 

Includes an afterword, a dictionary of characters, chronological tables and notes. Illustrated with engravings taken from scientific works of the time.

Cyrano de Bergerac (1977). L'Autre Monde ou les Estats et Empires de la lune [The Other World or the States and Empires of the Moon]. Societe des textes francais modernes (in French). Edited by Madeleine Alcover. Paris: Honore Champion. 
Cyrano de Bergerac (1982). La Mort d'Agrippine [The Death of Agrippina]. Textes Litteraires (in French) 44. Exeter: University of Exeter. ISBN 0-85989-182-8. 
Cyrano de Bergerac (1998). L'Autre monde : Les Etats et empires de la Lune. Les Etats et empires du Soleil [The Other World: The States and Empires of the Moon. The States and Empires of the Sun.]. Bibliotheque de la Pleiade: Libertins du XVIIe siecle (in French) I. Edited by Jacques Prevot. Paris: Gallimard. 

Includes an introduction, chronology and bibliography

Cyrano de Bergerac (1999). Lettres satiriques et amoureuses, precedees de Lettres diverses (in French). Edited and annotated by Jean-Charles Darmon et Alain Mothu. Paris: Desjonqueres. 
Cyrano de Bergerac (2001). OEuvres completes : L'Autre Monde ou les Etats et Empires de la lune. Les Etats et empires du soleil. Fragment de physique [Complete Works: The Other World or the States and Empires of the Moon. The States and Empires of the Sun. Fragment of Physics] (in French) I. Edited and annotated by Madeleine Alcover. Paris: Honore Champion. ISBN 9782745314529. 
Republished as:
Cyrano de Bergerac (2004). Les Etats et Empires de la Lune et du Soleil (avec le Fragment de physique) [The States and Empires of the Moon and the Sun (with the Fragment of Physics)]. Champion Classiques: Litteratures (in French). Edited and annotated by Madeleine Alcover. Paris: Honore Champion. 

Cyrano de Bergerac (2001). OEuvres completes : Lettres. Entretiens pointus. Mazarinades. Les Etats et empires de la lune. Les Etats et empires du soleil. Fragment de physique (in French) II. Edited and annotated by Luciano Erba (Lettres, Entretiens pointus) and Hubert Carrier (Mazarinades). Paris: Honore Champion. ISBN 9782745304292. 
Cyrano de Bergerac (2001). OEuvres completes : Theatre [Complete Works: Theatre] (in French) III. Edited and annotated by Andre Blanc. Paris: Honore Champion. ISBN 9782745304193. 
Cyrano de Bergerac (2003). Les Etats et Empires du Soleil [The States and Empires of the Sun]. GF (in French). Edited by Berengere Parmentier. Paris: Flammarion. 

Introduction, chronology, notes, documentation, bibliography and lexicon by Berengere Parmentier.


=== Biographies ===
Lefevre, Louis-Raymond (1927). La Vie de Cyrano de Bergerac [The Life of Cyrano de Bergerac]. Vies des hommes illustres (in French). Paris: Gallimard. 
Magy, Henriette (1927). Le Veritable Cyrano de Bergerac [The True Cyrano de Bergerac] (in French). Paris: Le Rouge et le Noir. 
Pellier, Henri (1929). Cyrano de Bergerac. Les livres roses pour la jeunesse (in French). Paris: Larousse. 
Pujos, Charles (1951). Le Double Visage de Cyrano de Bergerac [The Two Faces of Cyrano de Bergerac] (in French). Agen: Imprimerie moderne. 
Mongredien, Georges (1964). Cyrano de Bergerac (in French). Paris: Berger-Levrault. 
de Spens, Willy (1989). Cyrano de Bergerac: l'esprit de revolte [Cyrano de Bergerac: The Spirit of Rebellion]. Les Infrequentables (in French). Monaco: Rocher. ISBN 2268008452. 
Cardoze, Michel (1994). Cyrano de Bergerac : libertin libertaire [Cyrano de Bergerac: Libertarian Libertine] (in French). Paris: Lattes. ISBN 2709614103. 
Germain, Anne (1996). Monsieur de Cyrano-Bergerac (in French). Paris - Lausanne-Paris: Maisonneuve et Larose - Acatos. 
Mourousy, Paul (2000). Cyrano de Bergerac : illustre mais inconnu [Cyrano de Bergerac: famous but unknown] (in French). Monaco: Rocher. ISBN 2268037894. 
Addyman, Ishbel (April 2008). Cyrano: The Life and Legend of Cyrano de Bergerac. London-New York-Sydney-Toronto: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 9780743286190. 
Prevot, Jacques (2011). Cyrano de Bergerac. L'Ecrivain de la crise (in French). Paris: Ellipses. ISBN 9782729864590. 


=== Studies of Cyrano or his work ===


==== Madeleine Alcover ====
Alcover, Madeleine (1970). La Pensee philosophique et scientifique de Cyrano de Bergerac [The Philosophical and Scientific Thought of Cyrano de Bergerac] (in French). Geneve: Droz. 
Alcover, Madeleine (Winter 1977). "Cyrano de Bergerac et le feu : les complexes prometheens de la science et du phallus" [Cyrano de Bergerac and fire: Promethean complexes of science and of the phallus] (PDF). Rice University Studies (in French) (63): 13-24. 
Alcover, Madeleine (1990). Cyrano relu et corrige : Lettres, Estats du soleil, Fragment de physique [Cyrano proofread and corrected: Lettres, Estats du soleil, Fragment de physique] (in French). Geneve: Droz. 
Alcover, Madeleine (1994). "Cyrano in carcere ". Papers on French Seventeenth Century Literature (in French) XXI (41): 393-418. 
Alcover, Madeleine (1995). "Sisyphe au Parnasse : la reception des oeuvres de Cyrano aux XVIIe et XVIIIe siecles" [Sisyphus on Parnassus: The reception of the work of Cyrano in the 17th and 18th centuries]. OEuvres & Critiques (in French) (Tubingen, Gunter Narr Verlag: Revue internationale d'etude de la reception critique des oeuvres litteraires de langue francaise) XX (3): 219-250. 
Alcover, Madeleine (1996). "Essai de titrologie : les recits de Cyrano de Bergerac". Libertinage et philosophie au XVIIe siecle (in French) (1): 75-94. 
Alcover, Madeleine (1997). "Le troisieme manuscrit de L'Autre Monde de Cyrano de Bergerac" [The third manuscript of Cyrano de Bergerac's The Other World]. XVIIe siecle (in French) 196 (3): 597-608. 
Alcover, Madeleine (1999). "Un gay trio : Cyrano, Chapelle, Dassoucy" [A gay trio: Cyrano, Chapelle, Dassoucy]. L'autre au XVIIe siecle. Actes du 4e colloque du Centre international de rencontres sur le XVIIe siecle. University of Miami, 23 au 25 avril 1998. Biblio 17 (in French) (Tubingen, Gunter Narr Verlag: Ralph Heyndels et Barbara Woshinsky): 265-275. 
Alcover, Madeleine (2000). Cyrano et les devots : Materia actuosa. Antiquite, Age classique, Lumieres. Melanges en l'honneur d'Olivier Bloch recueillis par Miguel Benitez, Antony McKenna, Gianni Paganini et Jean Salem (in French). Paris: Honore Champion. pp. 146-155. 
Alcover, Madeleine (2000). "Les paroissiens de Sannois et la profanation de 1649. Contribution a la biographie de Cyrano de Bergerac" [The parishioners of Sannois and the desecration of 1649. Contribution to the biography of Cyrano de Bergerac]. La Lettre clandestine (in French) (9): 307-313. 
Alcover, Madeleine (2001). "" Ah ! dites-moi, mere-grand " : l'ascension sociale des grands-parents paternels de Cyrano" ["Ah! tell me, grandmother": the social ascent of Cyrano's paternal grandparents]. La Lettre clandestine (in French) (10): 327-337. 
Alcover, Madeleine (2003). "A la recherche des Cyrano de Sens" [On the trail of the Cyranos of Sens]. La Lettre clandestine (in French) (11): 215-225. 
Alcover, Madeleine (2003). "Sesame, ouvre-toi ! Les tresors caches du Minutier central". La Lettre clandestine (in French) (12): 297-309. 
Alcover, Madeleine (2004). "Statistique et critique d'attribution : l'edition posthume des Etats et Empires de la Lune" [Statistics and critical attribution: the posthumous edition of States and Empires of the Moon]. Litteratures classiques (in French) (53): 295-315. 
Alcover, Madeleine (2004). "Statistique et critique d'attribution : Requiem pour les mazarinades defuntes de Cyrano" [Statistics and critical attribution: Requiem for Cyrano's deceased mazarinades]. La Lettre clandestine (in French) (13): 233-259. 
Alcover, Madeleine (2004). "Le grand-pere de Cyrano etait-il senonais ?" [Was Cyrano's grandfather from Sens?]. La Lettre clandestine (in French) (13): 261-278. 
Alcover, Madeleine (February 2009). "Ephemerides ou biographie sommaire de Savinien de Cyrano de Bergerac" [Ephemeris or biographical summary of Savinien de Cyrano de Bergerac]. Les Dossiers du Grihl (in French) (Grihl). Retrieved 6 April 2015. 
Alcover, Madeleine (24 February 2009). "Le Bret, Cuigy, Casteljaloux, Bignon, Royer de Prade et Regnault des Boisclairs : du nouveau sur quelques bons amis de Cyrano et sur l'edition posthume des etats et empires de la lune (1657)". Les Dossiers du Grihl. Les dossiers de Jean-Pierre Cavaille, Libertinage, atheisme, irreligion. (in French) (Grihl). Retrieved 6 April 2015. 
Alcover, Madeleine (2 March 2009). "Sur les Lettres diverses d'Henry Le Bret, editeur de Cyrano et prevot de l'eglise de Montauban" [On the Lettres diverses of Henry Le Bret, editor of Cyrano and Provost of the Church of Montauban]. Les Dossiers du Grihl. Les dossiers de Jean-Pierre Cavaille, Libertinage, atheisme, irreligion. (in French) (Grihl). Retrieved 6 April 2015. 
Alcover, Madeleine (2009). "A propos d'opium, de Le Bret et de Cyrano" [Concerning opium, Le Bret and Cyrano]. Libertinism and Literature in Seventeenth-Century France, Actes du colloque de Vancouver, The University of British Columbia, 28-30 septembre 2006. Les dossiers de Jean-Pierre Cavaille, Libertinage, atheisme, irreligion. (in French) (Tubingen: Richard G. Hogdson. Gunter Narr Verlag): 301-314. 
Alcover, Madeleine (18 February 2010). "Savinien I de Cyrano et le protestantisme en appendice de " Ephemerides ou biographie sommaire de Savinien de Cyrano de Bergerac "" [Savinien I de Cyrano and Protestantism as an appendix to "Ephemeris or biographical summary of Savinien de Cyrano de Bergerac"]. Les Dossiers du Grihl (in French) (Grihl). Retrieved 6 April 2015. 
Alcover, Madeleine (17 April 2012). Le Cyrano de Bergerac de Jacques Prevot [The Cyrano de Bergerac of Jacques Prevot]. Les dossiers de Jean-Pierre Cavaille, Libertinage, atheisme, irreligion. Essais et bibliographie (in French). Les Dossiers du Grihl. Retrieved 6 April 2015. 


==== Guilhem Armand ====
Armand, Guilhem (2005). L'Autre Monde de Cyrano de Bergerac : un voyage dans l'espace du livre [The Other World of Cyrano de Bergerac: a journey into book space] (in French). Paris: Lettres modernes Minard. ISBN 2256904776. 
Armand, Guilhem (2008). Meitinger, S.; Bosquet, M.F.; Terramorsi, B., eds. Une figure paradoxale : le guide dans les voyages libertins de la fin du XVIIe siecle. Le cas de L'Autre Monde de Cyrano de Bergerac [A paradoxical figure: the guide in libertine journeys at the end of the 17th century. The case of Cyrano de Bergerac's Other World]. Voyage, alterite, utopie. Aux confins de l'ailleurs et Nulle part. (in French). In homage to Professeur J.-M. Racault. Paris: Klincksieck. pp. 141-150. 
Armand, Guilhem (June 2005). "Idee d'une Republique Philosophique : l'impossible utopie solaire de Cyrano" [The Idea of a Philosophical Republic: Cyrano's impossible solar utopia]. Expressions (in French) (25): 63-80. Retrieved 6 April 2015. 


==== Pierre-Antonin Brun ====
Brun, Pierre-Antonin (1893). Savinien de Cyrano Bergerac, sa vie et ses oeuvres d'apres des documents inedits [Savinien de Cyrano Bergerac, his life and works according to previously unknown documents] (in French). Paris. 
Brun, Pierre-Antonin (1909). Savinien de Cyrano Bergerac, gentilhomme parisien : l'histoire et la legende de Lebret a M. Rostand [Savinien de Cyrano Bergerac, Parisian gentleman: History and legend from Lebret to M. Rostand] (in French). Paris: Daragon. Retrieved 6 April 2015. 


==== Jean Lemoine ====
Lemoine, Jean (15 May 1911). "Le patrimoine de Cyrano de Bergerac" [The legacy of Cyrano de Bergerac]. La Revue de Paris (in French): 273-296. Retrieved 6 April 2015. 
Lemoine, Jean (12 April 1913). "La Veritable sepulture de Cyrano de Bergerac". Le Figaro. Supplement litteraire du dimanche (in French) (15). Retrieved 6 April 2015. 


==== Jacques Prevot ====
Prevot, Jacques (1977). Cyrano de Bergerac romancier [Cyrano de Bergerac novelist] (in French). Paris: Belin. ISBN 2701102979. 
Prevot, Jacques (1978). Cyrano de Bergerac, poete & dramaturge [Cyrano de Bergerac, poet & playwright] (in French). Paris: Belin. ISBN 2701103207. 


==== Others ====
Harry, Patricia; Mothu, Alain (2006). Sellier, Philippe, ed. Dissidents, excentriques et marginaux de l'Age classique : autour de Cyrano de Bergerac [Dissidents, eccentrics and the marginalised of the Classical Age: around Cyrano de Bergerac.] (in French). Bouquet offert a Madeleine Alcover [A bouquet for Madeleine Alcover]. Paris: Honore Champion. ISBN 2745314440. 
Bargy, Herve, ed. (2008). Cyrano de Bergerac, Cyrano de Sannois : actes du colloque international de Sannois (3 et 17 decembre 2005) (in French). Brepols. ISBN 9782503523842. 
Calvie, Laurent; Le Bret, H. (2004). Cyrano de Bergerac dans tous ses etats [Cyrano de Bergerac in all his states] (in French). Toulouse: Anacharsis. ISBN 2914777167. 
Carre, Rose-Marie (1977). Cyrano de Bergerac : voyages imaginaires a la recherche de la verite humaine [Cyrano de Bergerac: imaginary journeys in search of human truth] (in French). Paris: Lettres modernes. ISBN 2256903648. 
Fredy de Coubertin, Paul (1898). "La famille de Cyrano de Bergerac" [The family of Cyrano de Bergerac]. La Nouvelle Revue (in French) (mai-juin 1898): 427-437. Retrieved 6 April 2015. 
Stankey, Margaret (2000). Le materialisme dans L'Autre Monde de Cyrano de Bergerac : Materia actuosa. Antiquite, Age classique, Lumieres. Melanges en l'honneur d'Olivier Bloch recueillis par Miguel Benitez, Antony McKenna, Gianni Paganini et Jean Salem [Materialism in L'Autre Monde of Cyrano de Bergerac] (in French). Paris: Honore Champion. pp. 157-179. 
Darmon, Jean-Charles (2004). Le Songe libertin : Cyrano de Bergerac d'un monde a l'autre [The Libertine Dream: Cyrano de Bergerac from one world to another] (in French). Paris: Klincksieck. ISBN 2252034831. 
Darmon, Jean-Charles (1998). Philosophie epicurienne et litterature au XVIIe siecle. Etudes sur Gassendi, Cyrano de Bergerac, La Fontaine, Saint-Evremond [Epicurian philosophy and literature of the 17th century. Studies on Gassendi, Cyrano de Bergerac, La Fontaine, Saint-Evremond]. Perspectives litteraires (in French). Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. 
Delaplace, Jacques (1994). "Cyrano de Bergerac". Stemma, revue du CEGHIDF (in French) (62): 1367-1372. 
Delluc, Brigitte; Delluc, Gilles (2003). "Cyrano Parisien ? Oui, mais..." [Cyrano a Parisian? Yes, but...]. Bulletin de la Societe historique et archeologique du Perigord (in French) (130): 603-622. 
Goldin, Jeanne (1973). Cyrano de Bergerac et l'art de la pointe (in French). Montreal: Presses de l'Universite de Montreal. ISBN 9780840502155. 
Canseliet, Eugene (1947). Cyrano de Bergerac philosophe hermetique [Cyrano de Bergerac, hermetic philosopher]. Les Cahiers d'Hermes (in French) I. Paris: La Colombe. pp. 65-82. 
Magne, Emile (1898). Les Erreurs de documentation de " Cyrano de Bergerac " (in French). Paris: Editions de la Revue de France. Retrieved 6 April 2015. 
Michel, Frederic (1977). Une OEuvre : De la terre a la lune (in French). Paris: Hatier. 
Moureau, Francois (1997). "Dyrcona exegete ou les reecritures de la Genese selon Cyrano de Bergerac". Cahiers d'histoire des litteratures romanes/Romanistische Zeitschrift fur Literaturgeschichte (in French) (3/4): 261-268. 
Nodier, Charles (1831). "Cyrano de Bergerac". Revue de Paris (in French) (Paris) (29): 38-107. Retrieved 6 April 2015. 
Onfray, Michel (2007). Contre-histoire de la philosophie : Les libertins baroques [Counter-history of Philosophy: the Baroque Libertines] (in French) 3. Grasset. pp. chapitre V, Cyrano de Bergerac et le "librement vivre". 
Parmentier, Berengere, ed. (2004). Lectures de Cyrano de Bergerac, Les Etats et Empires de la Lune et du Soleil (in French). Rennes: Pressus Universitaires de Rennes. 
de Poli, Oscar (1898). "Les Cirano de Mauvieres et de Bergerac" [The Ciranos of Mauvieres and Bergerac]. Revue des questions heraldiques, archeologiques et historiques (in French) (juillet-aout-septembre 1898): 51-132. 
Roman, Joseph (1894). "Cyrano de Bergerac et sa famille" [Cyrano de Bergerac and his family]. Revue d'histoire litteraire de la France (in French): 451-455. Retrieved 6 April 2015. 
Rosellini, Michele; Costentin, Catherine (2004). Cyrano de Bergerac : Les Etats et les Empires de la Lune et du Soleil [Cyrano de Bergerac: The States and the Empires of the Moon and the Sun]. Clefs Concours (in French). Neuilly: Atlande. 
Samaran, Charles (18 December 1910). "La Mort de Cyrano" [The Death of Cyrano]. Journal des debats politiques et litteraires (in French) (Paris) (350): 3. Retrieved 6 April 2015. 
Torero-Ibad, Alexandra (2009). Libertinage, science et philosophie dans le materialisme de Cyrano de Bergerac [Libertinism, science and philosophy in the materialism of Cyrano de Bergerac] (in French). Preface by Francine Markovits. Paris: Honore Champion. 
van Vledder, W. H. (1976). Cyrano de Bergerac, 1619-1655, philosophe esoterique : etude de la structure et du symbolisme d'une oeuvre mystique (L'autre monde) du XVIIe siecle [Cyrano de Bergerac, 1619-1655, esoteric philosopher: stuy of the structure and symbolism of a mystical work (L'autre monde) of the 17th century] (in French). Amsterdam: Holland Universiteits Pers. ISBN 9030212063. 


=== Other resources ===
Advielle, Victor (1877). Le Siege d'Arras en 1640, d'apres la "Gazette" du temps [The Siege of Arras in 1640, according to the "Gazette" of the time]. Bibliotheque Artesienne NdegI (in French). Arras, Paris: H. Schoutheer, Chossonery. 
Brice, Germain (1725). Nouvelle description de la ville de Paris, et de tout ce qu'elle contient de plus remarquable (in French) 2. Paris: Julien-Michel Gandouin. 
de Bussy-Rabutin, Roger; Lalanne, Ludovic (1857). Memoires de Roger de Rabutin, comte de Bussy, lieutenant-general des armees du roi, Mestre de camp general de la cavalerie legere. [Memories of Roger de Rabutin, Count de Bussy, Lieutenant-General of the King's Army, Mestre de camp general of the Light Horse.] (in French) I. Paris: Charpentier. 
Crespin, Jean (1570). Histoire des vrays tesmoins de la verite de l'Evangile [History of the True Witnesses to the Truth of the Evangelist] (in French). Geneve: Eustache Vignon. p.81 verso - p.82 recto. 
Cyprien de la Nativite de la Vierge, Roger (1651). La destruction du duel, par le jugement de Messeigneurs les mareschaux de France, sur la protestation de plusieurs gentilshommes de marque...et quelques reflexions sur ce sujet [The destruction of the duel, by the judgement of my Lords the Marshals of France, under the objection of several gentlemen of note...and some remarks on this subject] (in French). Paris: Jean Roger. 
Cyprien de la Nativite de la Vierge, Roger (1660). Recueil des vertus et des ecrits de Madame le Baronne Neuvillette decedee depuis peu dans la ville de Paris. [Collection of the virtues and writings of Madam the Baronness Neuvillette recently deceased in the city of Paris.] (in French). Paris: Denys Bechet & Louis Billaine. 
Daniel, R.P. Gabriel (1721). Histoire de la milice francoise [History of the French Militia] (in French) II. Paris: Jean-Baptiste Coignard. 
D'Assoucy, Charles Coypeau (1671). Les rimes redoublees de M. Dassoucy (in French). Paris: C. Nego. 
D'Assoucy, Charles Coypeau (1677). Les Avantures de Monsieur d'Assoucy (in French) II. Paris: C. Audinet. 
D'Assoucy, Charles Coypeau (1678). Les Avantures de Monsieur d'Assoucy (in French) I. Paris: C. Audinet. 
de Lauze, Francois (1623). Apologie de la danse et la parfaicte methode de l'enseigner tant aux cavaliers qu'aux dames (in French). 
Drevillon, Herve (2002). "L'heroisme a l'epreuve de l'absolutisme. L'exemple du marechal de Gassion (1609-1647)". Politix (in French) 15 (58): 15-38. 
Comte de Druy (1658). La beaute de la valeur et la laschete du duel. Divise en quatre parties (in French). Paris: Jean Bessin & Nicollas Trabouillet. 
Dubuisson-Aubenay (1885). Journal des guerres civiles: 1648-1652 (in French) 2. Paris: Honore Champion. 
d'Yanville, Comte H. Coustant (1875) [1866-1875]. Chambre des comptes de Paris: Essais historiques et chronologiques, privileges et attributions nobiliaires et armorial (in French). Paris: J. B. Dumoulin. p. 882. 
Abbe Michel de Pure (1673). La Vie du Marechal de Gassion (in French) III. Paris: Guillaume de Luyne. 
Du Prat, Pierre (1664). Le Portrait du Mareschal de Gassion (in French). Paris: Pierre Bienfait. 
Duval, Guillaume (1644). Le College royal de France (in French). Paris: Mace Bouillette. 
Eveque de Macon, ed. (1770). Collection des proces-verbaux des assemblees generales du clerge de France depuis l'annee 1560 jusqu'a present rediges par ordre de matiere et reduits a ce qu'ils ont d'essentiel (in French) 4. Paris: Guillaume Desprez. 
Fulcanelli (1930). Les Demeures philosophales et le Symbolisme hermetique dans ses rapports avec l'art sacre et l'esoterisme du grand-oeuvre (in French). Paris: Jean Schemit. 
Furetiere, Antoine (1690). Dictionnaire universel, contenant generalement tous les mots francois tant vieux que modernes, et les termes de toutes les sciences et des arts... (in French). La Haye: A. et R. Leers. 
Goffart, N. (1892). "Precis d'une histoire de la ville et du pays de Mouzon (Ardennes). IX. Histoire militaire au XVIIe siecle. a. Le siege de 1639 et la Guerre de Trente ans". Revue de Champagne et de Brie. 2 (in French) (Paris: H. Menu) IV (17e annee). 
Goujet, Abbe Claude-Pierre (1758). Memoire historique & litteraire sur le College royal de France, seconde partie (in French). A.-M. Lottin. pp. 138-142. 
Griselle, Eugene (1912). Etat de la maison du roi Louis XIII (in French). Paris: P. Catin. p. 34. 
Hennig, Jean-Luc (2011). Dassoucy et les garcons (in French). Paris: Fayard. 
d'Hericourt, Achmet-Marie de Servin (1844). Les Sieges d'Arras, histoire des expeditions militaires dont cette ville et son territoire ont ete le theatre (in French). Arras: Topino. 
Huguet, Adrien (1920). Un Grand marechal des logis de la maison du roi, le Marquis de Cavoye, 1640-1716 (in French). Paris: Champion. 
Jal, Auguste (1872). Dictionnaire critique de biographie et d'histoire: errata et supplement pour tous les dictionnaires historiques, d'apres des documents authentiques inedits. (in French). Paris: H. Plon. p. 463. 
Jurgens, Madeleine (1967). Documents du Minutier central concernant l'histoire de la musique, 1600-1650 (in French) I. Paris: S.E.V.P.E.N. 
de La Chesnaye des Bois, Francois-Alexandre Aubert (1778). Dictionnaire de la noblesse: contenant les genealogies, l'histoire et la chronologie des familles nobles de France (in French) XII. Paris: Antoine Boudet. 
de Lacolle, Capitaine Noel (1901). Histoire des Gardes-Francaises (in French). Paris: H. Charles-Lavauzelle. 
Lambeau, Lucien (1898). Un vieux couvent parisien : les Dominicaines de la Croix de la rue de Charonne (1639-1904). Proces-verbal de la seance de la Commission municipale du Vieux Paris du 11 avril 1908 (in French). Paris: Imprimerie municipale. pp. 65 and following. 
Larcade, Veronique (2005). Les Cadets de Gascogne, une histoire turbulente (in French). Editions Ouest-France. 
de La Touche, Philibert (1670). Les Vrays principes de l'espee seule... (in French). Paris: Armand Colin. 
Laverdet, Auguste-Nicolas, ed. (1858). Correspondance entre Boileau Despreaux et Brossette (in French). Paris: J. Techener. 
Lauzun, Philippe (1915). "Le chateau de Carbon de Casteljaloux: sa correspondance d'apres les notes de Mgr de Carsalade". Bulletin de la Societe archeologique du Gers (in French) (Auch: L. Cocharaux) (16): 156-166. 
Le Bret, Henry (1657). Preface de l'Histoire comique par Monsieur de Cyrano Bergerac, contenant les Estats et empires de la Lune (in French). Paris: Charles de Sercy. 
Loret, Jean (1857). La muze historique, ou Recueil des lettres en vers contenant les nouvelles du temps: ecrites a Son Altesse Mademoizelle de Longueville, depuis duchesse de Nemours (1650-1665) (in French) I. Paris: P. Jannet. 
Magne, Emile (1920). Un Ami de Cyrano de Bergerac, le chevalier de Lignieres: Plaisante histoire d'un poete libertin d'apres des documents inedits (in French). Paris: R. Chiberre. 
Menage, Gilles; Galland, Antoine; Goulley de Boisrobert, Alexandre, eds. (1694). Menagiana ou les bons mots, les pensees critiques, historiques, morales et d'erudition de Monsieur Menage recueillies par ses amis: seconde edition augmentee (in French). Paris: Florentin & Pierre Delaulne. 
Menage, Gilles; de La Monnoye, Bernard, eds. (1715). Menagiana, ou les bons mots et remarques critiques, historiques, morales & d'erudition de Monsieur Menage, recueillies par ses amis: troisieme edition plus ample de moitie, & plus correcte que les precedentes (in French) 3. Paris: Florentin Delaulne. 
Nolano, Bruno (1633). Boniface et le pedant: comedie en prose, imitee de l'italien de Bruno Nolano (in French). Paris: Pierre Menard. 
de Paul, Vincent (1920). Coste, Pierre, ed. Correspondance, entretiens et documents (in French) I. Paris: Librarie Lecoffre / J. Gabalda. p. 30. 
Pinard (1761). Chronologie historique-militaire (in French) 4. Paris: Claude Herissant. 
Pinard (1763). Chronologie historique-militaire (in French) 6. Paris: Claude Herissant. 
Rey, Francois (2013). "Ephemerides 1658" (PDF). Moliere.Paris-Sorbonne (in French). 
Rey, Francois (2007). Moliere et le roi. L'Affaire Tartuffe (in French). Paris: Le Seuil. 
Rey, Francois (2010). Album Moliere (in French). Paris: Gallimard. p. 29. 
Rohault, Jacques (1671). Traite de physique (in French). Paris: Denys Thierry. 
Carey Rosett, L. (1954). "A la recherche de la Compagnie du Saint-Sacrement a Montauban". Revue d'histoire de l'Eglise de France (in French) 40 (135): 206-228. 
de Prade, Jean Le Royer (1650). Le Trophee d'armes heraldiques: Ou la science du Blason, avec les figures en Taille douce. (in French). Paris: Pierre Targa. 
Sauval, Henri (1724). Histoire et recherches des antiquites de la ville de Paris (in French) 3. Paris: Charles Moette & Jacques Chardon. 
Scarron, Paul (1648). La relation veritable de tout ce qui s'est passe en l'autre monde au combat des Parques & des poetes, sur la mort de Voitture. Et autres pieces burlesques, par Mr Scarron (in French). Paris: Toussainct Quinet. 
Scarron, Paul (1656). Recueil des epitres en vers burlesques de Monsieur Scarron et d'autres autheurs sur ce qui s'est passe de remarquable en l'annee 1655 (in French). Paris: Alexandre Lesselin. 
de Scudery, Madeleine (1655). Clelie, histoire romaine: dediee a Mademoiselle de Longueville (in French) 2. Paris: Augustin Courbe. 
de Scudery, Madeleine (1661). Clelie, histoire romaine: dediee a Mademoiselle de Longueville (in French) 5. Paris: Augustin Courbe. 
Tallemant des Reaux, Gedeon (1861). Monmerque, Louis Jean Nicolas, ed. Les historiettes de Tallemant des Reaux: memoires pour servir a l'histoire du XVIIe siecle : publies sur le manuscrit autographe de l'auteur : precedee d'une notice sur l'auteur, augmentee de passages inedits et accompagnee de notes et d'eclaircissements (in French). 3 & 4. Paris: Garnier Freres. 
Tallemant des Reaux, Gedeon (1835). Monmerque, Louis Jean Nicolas, ed. Les historiettes de Tallemant des Reaux: memoires pour servir a l'histoire du XVIIe siecle : publies sur le manuscrit autographe de l'auteur : precedee d'une notice sur l'auteur, augmentee de passages inedits et accompagnee de notes et d'eclaircissements (in French) 6. Paris: Levavasseur. 
Tallemant des Reaux, Gedeon (1840). Monmerque, Louis Jean Nicolas, ed. Les historiettes de Tallemant des Reaux: memoires pour servir a l'histoire du XVIIe siecle : publies sur le manuscrit autographe de l'auteur : precedee d'une notice sur l'auteur, augmentee de passages inedits et accompagnee de notes et d'eclaircissements (in French). 5 & 6 (2nd ed.). Paris: H.L. Delloye. 
Tallemant des Reaux, Gedeon (1840). Monmerque, Louis Jean Nicolas, ed. Les historiettes de Tallemant des Reaux: memoires pour servir a l'histoire du XVIIe siecle : publies sur le manuscrit autographe de l'auteur : precedee d'une notice sur l'auteur, augmentee de passages inedits et accompagnee de notes et d'eclaircissements (in French) 9 (2nd ed.). Paris: H.L. Delloye. 
Ternois, Rene; Societe d'histoire litteraire de la France (1933). Revue d'histoire litteraire de la France (in French). Paris: Armand Colin. 
de Viau, Theophile (1982) [1855-1856]. Alleaume, M., ed. OEuvres completes de Theophile : annotee et precedee d'une notice biographique par M. Alleaume (in French) 2. Millwood (N.Y.): Kraus reprint. 


=== Works inspired by Cyrano ===


== See also ==
Asteroid 3582 Cyrano, named after de Bergerac


== Notes ==


== References ==
A

B

C

D

F

G

H

I

J

L

M

N

P

R

S

T

V

Others


== External links ==
Works by Cyrano de Bergerac at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Cyrano de Bergerac at Internet Archive
Works by Cyrano de Bergerac at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Petri Liukkonen. "Cyrano de Bergerac". Books and Writers (kirjasto.sci.fi). Archived from the original on 4 July 2013.
Le Vrai Cyrano de Bergerac - Biography (French)
Cyrano(s) de Bergerac - Information on fictional portrayals compared to the real person (French)
The Other World: Society and Government of the Moon - annotated English language edition