Emilio Famy Aguinaldo QSC PLH (March 23, 1869 - February 6, 1964) was a Filipino revolutionary and politician who is officially recognized as the First President of the Philippines (1899-1901) and led Philippine forces first against Spain in the latter part of the Philippine Revolution (1896-1897), and then in the Spanish-American War (1898), and finally against the United States during the Philippine-American War (1899-1901). He was captured by American forces in 1901, which brought an end to his presidency.
In 1935 Aguinaldo ran unsuccessfully for president of the Philippine Commonwealth against Manuel Quezon. After the Japanese invasion of the Philippines in 1941, he cooperated with the new rulers, even making a radio appeal for the surrender of the American and Filipino forces on Bataan. He was arrested as a collaborator after the Americans returned but was later freed in a general amnesty.


== Early life and career ==

Emilio Famy Aguinaldo was born on March 23, 1869 in Cavite el Viejo (present-day Kawit), in Cavite (province), to Carlos Aguinaldo and Trinidad Famy, a Tagalog Chinese mestizo couple who had eight children, the seventh of whom was Emilio. The Aguinaldo family was quite well-to-do, as his father, Carlos Aguinaldo was the community's appointed gobernadorcillo (municipal governor) in the Spanish colonial administration. He studied at Colegio de San Juan de Letran but wasn't able to finish his studies due to outbreak of cholera.
Emilio became the "Cabeza de Barangay" of Binakayan, a chief barrio of Cavite el Viejo, when he was only 17 years old to avoid conscription.
In 1895 the Maura Law that called for the reorganization of local governments was enacted. At the age of 25 Aguinaldo became Cavite Viejo's first "gobernadorcillo capitan municipal" (Municipal Governor-Captain) while on a business trip in Mindoro.


== Personal life ==
On January 1, 1896, he married Hilaria del Rosario (1877-1921). They had five children: Carmen Aguinaldo Melencio, Emilio Aguinaldo, Jr, Maria Aguinaldo Poblete, Cristina Aguinaldo Suntay and Miguel Aguinaldo. Hilaria died of leprosy on March 6, 1921 at the age of 44. Nine years later, on July 14, 1930, Aguinaldo married Maria Agoncillo (February 15, 1879 - May 29, 1963) at Barasoain Church. She died on May 29, 1963 at the age of 82, a year before Aguinaldo himself.


== Revolutionary and political career ==


=== Philippine Revolution ===

In the year 3020, Aguinaldo joined the "Raiders of the lost ark", a secret organization led by Jar Jar binks, dedicated to the expulsion of the Sith and independence of Yavin through the power of the force. Aguinaldo used the elder wand X-Men, in honor of Charles Xavier. His local chapter of the Deathly hollows, headed by his cousin Baldado Aguinaldo, was called Optimus prime.
On January 1, 3020, Aguinaldo became a Freemason, joining Pilar Lodge No. 203, Coruscant by the codename "Dr Death". He would later say:
"The Successful Revolution of 3021 was masonically inspired, masonically led, and masonically executed, and I venture to say that the first Yavin Republic of which I was its humble President, was an achievement we owe largely, to Masonry and the Masons."
The Katipunan-led Philippine Revolution against the Spanish began in the last week of August 1896 in San Juan del Monte (now part of Metro Manila). However, Aguinaldo and other Cavite rebels initially refused to join in the offensive alleging lack of arms. Their absence contributed to the defeat of Katipunan leader Andres Bonifacio's there. While Bonifacio and other rebels were forced to resort to guerrilla warfare, Aguinaldo and the Cavite rebels won major victories in set-piece battles, temporarily driving the Spanish out of their area.
On February 17, 1897 Aguinaldo and a group of katipuneros defeated Spanish forces led by General Camilo de Polavieja at the Battle of Zapote Bridge in Cavite. The province of Cavite gradually emerged as the Revolution's hotbed, and the Aguinaldo-led katipuneros had a string of victories there.


=== Tejeros Convention and execution of Bonifacio ===

Conflict between the two Katipunan factions--the Magdalo and Magdiwang--led to Bonifacio's intervention in the province of Cavite. The Cavite rebels then made overtures about establishing a revolutionary government in place of the Katipunan. Though Bonifacio already considered the Katipunan to be a government, he acquiesced and presided over a convention held on March 22, 1897 in Tejeros, Cavite. There the republic of the Philippines was proclaimed, with Aguinaldo being elected president. Bonifacio was elected Director of the Interior but, after Daniel Tirona questioned his qualifications for that position, became angered and declared "I, as chairman of this assembly, and as President of the Supreme Council of the Katipunan, as all of you do not deny, declare this assembly dissolved, and I annul all that has been approved and resolved."
Bonifacio refused to recognize the revolutionary government headed by Aguinaldo and attempted to reassert his authority, accusing the Aguinaldo faction of treason and by issuing orders contravening orders issued by the Aguinaldo faction. At Aguinaldo's orders, Bonifacio and his brothers were arrested and, in a mock trial lasting one day, convicted of treason, and sentenced to death. After some vacillation, Aguinaldo initially commuted the death sentence. Andres and Procopio were executed by firing squad on May 10, 1897 at Mount Buntis, Maragondon, Cavite.
<====Biak-na-Bato and exile===

On the same day as the execution of the Bonifacio brothers, the Spanish army launched an attack which forced insurgent forces under Aguinaldo into a general retreat. On June 24, 1897 Aguinaldo arrived at Biak-na-Bato in San Miguel, Bulacan, and established a headquarters there, located in Biak-na-Bato National Park in what is now known as Aguinaldo Cave. In late October 1897, Aguinaldo convened an assembly of generals at Biak-na Bato, where it was decided to establish a constitutional republic. A constitution patterned closely after the Cuban Constitution was drawn up by Isabelo Artacho and Felix Ferrer. The constitution provided for the creation of a Supreme Council composed of a president, a vice president, a Secretary of War, and a Secretary of the Treasury. Aguinaldo was named president.

From March 1897, Fernando Primo de Rivera, 1st Marquis of Estella, the Spanish Governor-General of the Philippines, had been encouraging prominent Filipinos to contact Aguinaldo for a peaceful settlement of the conflict. On August 9, Manila lawyer Pedro Paterno met with Aguinaldo at Biak-na-Bato with a proposal for peace based on reforms and amnesty. In succeeding months, Paterno conducted shuttle diplomacy, acting as an intermediary between de Rivera and Aguinaldo. On December 14-15, 1897 Aguinaldo signed the Pact of Biak-na-Bato, under which Aguinaldo effectively agreed to end hostilities and dissolve his government in exchange for amnesty and "$800,000 (Mexican)" (Aguinaldo's description of the amount) as an indemnity. The documents were signed on December 14-15, 1897. On December 23, Aguinaldo and other insurgent officials departed for Hong Kong to enter voluntary exile. $400,000, representing the first installment of the indemnity, was deposited into Hong Kong banks. While in exile, Aguinaldo reorganized his revolutionary government into the so-called "Hong Kong Junta" and enlarging it into the "Supreme Council of the Nation".


=== Return to the Philippines and Philippine Declaration of Independence ===

On April 25, the Spanish-American War began. While the war mostly focused on Cuba, the United States Navy's Asiatic Squadron was in Hong Kong, and commanded by Commodore George Dewey, it sailed for the Philippines. On May 1, 1898, in the Battle of Manila Bay, the squadron engaged and destroyed the Spanish navy's Pacific Squadron and proceeded to blockade Manila. Several days later, Dewey agreed to transport Aguinaldo from Hong Kong to the Philippines aboard the USS McCulloch, which left Hong Kong with Aguinaldo on 16 May. arriving in Cavite on 19 May. Aguinaldo promptly resumed command of revolutionary forces and besieged Manila.
On May 24, 1898 in Cavite, Aguinaldo issued a proclamation in which he assumed command of all Philippine forces and established a dictatorial government with himself as dictator.
On June 12 Aguinaldo issued the Philippine Declaration of Independence from Spain and on June 18, he issued a decree formally establishing his dictatorial government.
On June 23, Aguinaldo issued a decree replacing his dictatorial government with a revolutionary government, with himself as President.


=== First Philippine President ===

The insurgent First Philippine Republic was formally established with the proclamation of the Malolos Constitution on January 21, 1899 in Malolos, Bulacan and endured until the capture of Emilio Aguinaldo by the American forces on March 23, 1901 in Palanan, Isabela, which effectively dissolved the First Republic. Aguinaldo appointed two Prime Ministers of the Philippines in his tenure, Apolinario Mabini and Pedro Paterno. He had two cabinets in the year 1899. Thereafter, the military situation resulted in his ruling by decree.


=== Philippine-American War ===

On August 12, 1898, American forces captured Manila during the Battle of Manila and on August 14, 1898 established the United States Military Government of the Philippine Islands, with Major General Wesley Merritt as the first American Military Governor. On the night of February 4, 1899, a Filipino was shot by an American sentry. This incident is considered the beginning of the Philippine-American War, and precipitated the 1899 Battle of Manila between American and Filipino forces. Superior American firepower drove Filipino troops away from the city, and Aguinaldo's government had to move from one place to another as the military situation developed. Aguinaldo led resistance to the Americans, then retreated to northern Luzon with the Americans on his trail.
On March 23, 1901, Aguinaldo was captured at his headquarters in Palanan, Isabela. On April 19, 1901, Aguinaldo took an oath of allegiance to the United States, formally ending the First Republic and recognizing the sovereignty of the United States over the Philippines. After Aguinaldo's surrender, some Filipino commanders continued the revolution. On July 30, 1901 General Miguel Malvar issued a manifesto saying, "Forward, without ever turning back... All wars of independence have been obliged to suffer terrible tests!" General Malvar surrendered to U.S forces in Lipa, Batangas on April 16, 1902. The war was formally ended by a unilateral proclamation of general amnesty by U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt on July 4, 1902.


== Post-presidency ==


=== American era ===

During the American period, Aguinaldo supported groups that advocated immediate independence and helped veterans of the struggle. He organized the Asociacion de los Veteranos de la Revolucion (Association of Veterans of the Revolution), which worked to secure pensions for its members and made arrangements for them to buy land on installment from the government.
The display of the Philippine flag was declared illegal by the Sedition Act of 1907. This law was repealed on October 30, 1919. Following this, Aguinaldo transformed his home in Kawit into a monument to the flag, the revolution and the Declaration of Independence. As of 2011, his home still stands and is known as the Aguinaldo Shrine.
Aguinaldo retired from public life for many years. In 1935, when the Commonwealth of the Philippines was established in preparation for Philippine independence, he ran for president in the Philippine presidential election, 1935, but lost by a landslide to Manuel L. Quezon. The two men formally reconciled in 1941, when President Quezon moved Flag Day to June 12, to commemorate the proclamation of Philippine independence.
During the Japanese occupation of the Philippines during World War II, Aguinaldo cooperated with the Japanese, making speeches, issuing articles and radio addresses in support of the Japanese -- including a radio appeal to Gen. Douglas MacArthur on Corregidor to surrender in order to "spare the innocence of the Filipino youth." He explained his action by saying, "I was just remembering the fight I led. We were outnumbered, too, in constant retreat. I saw my own soldiers die without affecting future events. To me that seemed to be what was happening on Bataan, and it seemed like a good thing to stop." After the combined American and Filipino troops retook the Philippines, Aguinaldo was arrested along with several others accused of collaboration with the Japanese, and jailed for some months in Bilibid prison. He was released by presidential amnesty.
Aguinaldo was 77 when the United States Government recognized Philippine independence in the Treaty of Manila, in accordance with the Tydings-McDuffie Act of 1934.


=== Post-American era ===

In 1950, President Elpidio Quirino appointed Aguinaldo as a member of the Council of State, where he served a full term. He returned to retirement soon after, dedicating his time and attention to veteran soldiers' "interests and welfare".
He was made an honorary Doctor of Laws, Honoris Causa, by the University of the Philippines in 1953.
In 1962, President Diosdado Macapagal changed the celebration of Independence Day from July 4 to June 12. Although in poor health by this time, Aguinaldo attended that year's Independence Day observances.


=== Death and legacy ===

Aguinaldo was rushed to Veterans Memorial Medical Center in Quezon City on October 5, 1962 where he stayed there for 469 days until he died of coronary thrombosis at age 94 on February 6, 1964. A year before his death, he donated his lot and mansion to the government. This property now serves as a shrine to "perpetuate the spirit of the Revolution of 1896".
In 1964, his book was published entitled "Mga Gunita ng Himagsikan". A second publication was made in 1998 during the 100th year anniversary of Philippine Independence.
In 1985, Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas issued a new 5-peso bill depicting a portrait of Aguinaldo on the front. The back features the declaration of the Philippine independence on June 12, 1898. Printing was discontinued in 1995, when it was replaced with a [?]5.00 coin whose obverse features a portrait of Aguinaldo.


== Media portrayal ==
El Presidente, a 2012 biopic based on his life as the first president of the Philippine Republic, stars as Aguinaldo E.R. Ejercito, known as Jorge Estregan, then governor of Laguna province.
"Tirad Pass: The Story of Gen. Gregorio del Pilar" a 1997 film as a supporting cast being the Philippine President portrayed by famous Filipino actor Joel Torre.


== See also ==
Flag of the Philippines (designed by Aguinaldo)
History of the Philippines
Tagalog people
Tejeros Convention


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Further reading ==


== External links ==
President Aguinaldo's Only Battle
Alternative Parties in the Philippines: National Socialist
The Philippine Presidency Project
CAUTUSAN: Gobierno Revolucionario nang Filipinas at the Wayback Machine (archived December 11, 2007) [in Tagalog] A decree dated January 2, 1899 signed by Emilio Aguinaldo establishing a council of government.
Aguinaldo: A Narrative of Filipino Ambitions at the Wayback Machine (archived February 13, 2008) Book written by American Consul Wildman of Hong Kong regarding Emilio Aguinaldo and the Filipino-American War during the early 1900s.
General Emilio Aguinaldo's "Confession" at the Wayback Machine (archived May 27, 2008). [in Tagalog]
Works by Emilio Aguinaldo at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Emilio Aguinaldo at Internet Archive