Haruki Murakami (Cun Shang  Chun Shu , Murakami Haruki, born January 12, 1949) is a contemporary Japanese writer. His books and stories have been bestsellers in Japan as well as internationally, with his work being translated into 50 languages and selling millions of copies outside his native country.
His works of fiction and non-fiction have garnered critical acclaim and numerous awards, both in Japan and internationally, including the World Fantasy Award (2006) and the Frank O'Connor International Short Story Award (2006), while his oeuvre received among others the Franz Kafka Prize (2006) and the Jerusalem Prize (2009). Murakami's most notable works include A Wild Sheep Chase (1982), Norwegian Wood (1987), The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle (1994-1995), Kafka on the Shore (2002), and 1Q84 (2009-2010). He has also translated a number of English works into Japanese, from Raymond Carver to J. D. Salinger.
Murakami's fiction, still criticized by Japan's literary establishment as un-Japanese, was influenced by Western writers from Chandler to Vonnegut by way of Brautigan. It is frequently surrealistic and melancholic or fatalistic, marked by a Kafkaesque rendition of the "recurrent themes of alienation and loneliness" he weaves into his narratives. He is also considered an important figure in postmodern literature. Steven Poole of The Guardian praised Murakami as "among the world's greatest living novelists" for his works and achievements.


== Biography ==
Murakami was born in Japan during the post-World War II baby boom. Although born in Kyoto, he spent his youth in Shukugawa (Nishinomiya), Ashiya and Kobe. His father was the son of a Buddhist priest, and his mother the daughter of an Osaka merchant. Both taught Japanese literature.
Since childhood, Murakami has been heavily influenced by Western culture, particularly Western music and literature. He grew up reading a wide range of works by European and American writers, such as Gustave Flaubert, Charles Dickens, Kurt Vonnegut, Richard Brautigan and Jack Kerouac. These Western influences distinguish Murakami from other Japanese writers.
Murakami studied drama at Waseda University in Tokyo, where he met his wife, Yoko. His first job was at a record store, much like Toru Watanabe, the narrator of Norwegian Wood. Shortly before finishing his studies, Murakami opened a coffeehouse and jazz bar, the Peter Cat, in Kokubunji, Tokyo, which he ran with his wife from 1974 to 1981--again, not unlike the protagonist in his later novel South of the Border, West of the Sun.
Murakami is a serious marathon runner and triathlon enthusiast, though he did not start running until he was 33 years old. On June 23, 1996, he completed his first ultramarathon, a 100-kilometer race around Lake Saroma in Hokkaido, Japan. He discusses his relationship with running in his 2008 memoir What I Talk About When I Talk About Running.


== Writing career ==


=== Trilogy of the Rat ===
Murakami began to write fiction when he was 29. "Before that", he said, "I didn't write anything. I was just one of those ordinary people. I was running a jazz club, and I didn't create anything at all." He was inspired to write his first novel, Hear the Wind Sing (1979), while watching a baseball game. In 1978, Murakami was in Jingu Stadium watching a game between the Yakult Swallows and the Hiroshima Carp when Dave Hilton, an American, came to bat. According to an oft-repeated story, in the instant that Hilton hit a double, Murakami suddenly realized that he could write a novel. He went home and began writing that night. Murakami worked on Hear the Wind Sing for ten months in very brief stretches after working days at the bar. He completed the novel and sent it to the only literary contest that would accept a work of that length, winning first prize.
Murakami's initial success with Hear the Wind Sing encouraged him to continue writing. A year later, he published a sequel, Pinball, 1973. In 1982, he published A Wild Sheep Chase, a critical success. Hear the Wind Sing, Pinball, 1973, and A Wild Sheep Chase form the Trilogy of the Rat (a sequel, Dance, Dance, Dance, was written later but is not considered part of the series), centered on the same unnamed narrator and his friend, "the Rat." The first two novels are unpublished in English translation outside of Japan, where an English edition, translated by Alfred Birnbaum with extensive notes, was published by Kodansha as part of a series intended for Japanese students of English. Murakami considers his first two novels to be "immature" and "flimsy", and has not been eager to have them translated into English. A Wild Sheep Chase, he says, was "the first book where I could feel a kind of sensation, the joy of telling a story. When you read a good story, you just keep reading. When I write a good story, I just keep writing."


=== Wider recognition ===

In 1985, Murakami wrote Hard-Boiled Wonderland and the End of the World, a dream-like fantasy that took the magical elements of his work to a new extreme. Murakami achieved a major breakthrough and national recognition in 1987 with the publication of Norwegian Wood, a nostalgic story of loss and sexuality. It sold millions of copies among Japanese youths, making Murakami a literary superstar in his native country. Per the publishing traditions of the Japanese shosetsu, the book was printed in two separate volumes. To this degree, the number of books sold by Western reckoning may be considered actually doubled, but "million-copy bestseller" characterisation remains far from hype. One book had a green cover, the other one red.
Norwegian Wood was the book that propelled the then generally unknown Murakami into a superstar who was mobbed at airports and the like, which partly led to his departure from Japan in 1986 to travel throughout Europe, and eventually, settle in the United States.
Murakami was a writing fellow at Princeton University in Princeton, New Jersey, Tufts University in Medford, Massachusetts, and Harvard University in Cambridge, Massachusetts. During this time he wrote South of the Border, West of the Sun and The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle.


=== From "detachment" to "commitment" ===
In 1995, he published The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle, a novel that fuses the realistic and fantastic, and contains elements of physical violence. It is also more socially conscious than his previous work, dealing in part with the difficult topic of war crimes in Manchukuo (Northeast China). The novel won the Yomiuri Prize, awarded by one of his harshest former critics, Kenzaburo Oe, winner of the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1994.
The processing of collective trauma soon became an important theme in Murakami's writing, which had previously been more personal in nature. After finishing The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle, Murakami returned to Japan in the aftermath of the Kobe earthquake and the Aum Shinrikyo gas attack. He came to terms with these events with his first work of non-fiction, Underground, and the short story collection after the quake. Underground consists largely of interviews of victims of the gas attacks in the Tokyo subway system.
Murakami himself mentions that he changed his position from one of "detachment" to one of "commitment" after staying in the USA in 1991. "His early books, he said, originated in an individual darkness, while his later works tap into the darkness found in society and history."
English translations of many of his short stories written between 1983 and 1990 have been collected in The Elephant Vanishes. Murakami has also translated many of the works of F. Scott Fitzgerald, Raymond Carver, Truman Capote, John Irving, and Paul Theroux, among others, into Japanese.
Murakami took an active role in translation of his work into English, encouraging "adaptations" of his texts to American reality rather than direct translation. Some of his works which appeared in German turned out to be translations from English rather than from Japanese (South of the Border, West of the Sun, 2000; The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle, 2000s), encouraged by Murakami himself. Both were later re-translated from Japanese.


=== Since 2000 ===
Sputnik Sweetheart was first published in 1999, followed by Kafka on the Shore in 2002, with the English translation following in 2005. Kafka on the Shore won the World Fantasy Award for Novels in 2006. The English version of his novel After Dark was released in May 2007. It was chosen by the New York Times as a "notable book of the year". In late 2005, Murakami published a collection of short stories titled Tokyo Kitanshu, or Dong Jing Qi Tan Ji , which translates loosely as "Mysteries of Tokyo." A collection of the English versions of twenty-four short stories, titled Blind Willow, Sleeping Woman, was published in August 2006. This collection includes both older works from the 1980s as well as some of Murakami's more recent short stories, including all five that appear in Tokyo Kitanshu.
In 2002, Murakami published the anthology Birthday Stories, which collects short stories on the theme of birthdays. The collection includes work by Russell Banks, Ethan Canin, Raymond Carver, David Foster Wallace, Denis Johnson, Claire Keegan, Andrea Lee, Daniel Lyons, Lynda Sexson, Paul Theroux, and William Trevor, as well as a story by Murakami himself. What I Talk About When I Talk About Running, containing tales about his experience as a marathon runner and a triathlete, was published in Japan in 2007, with English translations released in the U.K. and the U.S. in 2008. The title is a play on that of Raymond Carver's short story collection, What We Talk About When We Talk About Love.
Shinchosha Publishing published Murakami's novel 1Q84 in Japan on May 29, 2009. 1Q84 is pronounced as 'ichi kyu hachi yon', the same as 1984, as 9 is also pronounced as 'kyu' in Japanese. The book was longlisted for the Man Asian Literary Prize in 2011. However, after the anti-Japanese demonstrations, in China, in 2012, Murakami's books were removed from sale there, along with those of other Japanese authors. Murakami criticized the China-Japan political territorial dispute, characterizing the overwrought nationalistic response as "cheap liquor" which politicians were giving to the public. In February 2013, he announced the publication of his first novel in three years, set for April 2013; aside from the date of release, the announcement was intentionally vague.
In early January 2015, it was announced that the author will take emails and try to reply as "online agony uncle" (Murakami-san no tokoro) offering his opinions and advice on how to tackle all manner of difficulties. The author's publisher has prepared a website for operation from noon 15th January 2015. Questions are accepted and selected for reply by the author until 31st January.


== Writing style ==
Most of Haruki Murakami's works use first-person narrative in the tradition of the Japanese I Novel. He states that because family plays a significant role in traditional Japanese literature, any main character who is independent becomes a man who values freedom and solitude over intimacy. Also notable is Murakami's unique humor, as seen in his 2000 short story collection, After the Quake. In the story "Superfrog Saves Tokyo", the protagonist is confronted with a 6 foot tall frog that talks about the destruction of Tokyo over a cup of tea. In spite of the story's sober tone, Murakami feels the reader should be entertained once the seriousness of a subject has been broached. Another notable feature of Murakami's stories is the comments that come from the main characters as to how strange the story presents itself. Murakami explains that his characters experience what he experiences as he writes, which could be compared to a movie set where the walls and props are all fake.
Many of his novels have themes and titles that invoke classical music, such as the three books making up The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle: The Thieving Magpie (after Rossini's opera), Bird as Prophet (after a piano piece by Robert Schumann usually known in English as The Prophet Bird), and The Bird-Catcher (a character in Mozart's opera The Magic Flute). Some of his novels take their titles from songs: Dance, Dance, Dance (after The Dells' 1957 B-side song, although it is often thought it was titled after the Beach Boys' 1964 tune), Norwegian Wood (after The Beatles' song) and South of the Border, West of the Sun (after the song "South of the Border").
Some analyses see aspects of shamanism in his writing. In a 2000 article, Susan Fisher connected Japanese folk religion or Japanese shamanism with some elements of The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle, such as a descent into a dry well. At an October 2013 symposium held at the University of Hawaii, associate professor of Japanese Nobuko Ochner opined "there were many descriptions of traveling in a parallel world as well as characters who have some connection to shamanism" in Murakami's works.


== Recognition ==


=== Prizes for books ===
1979: Gunzo Award (best first novel) for Hear the Wind Sing
1982: Noma Literary Prize (best newcomer) for A Wild Sheep Chase
1985: Tanizaki Prize for Hard-Boiled Wonderland and the End of the World
1995: Yomiuri Prize (best novel) for The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle
1999: Kuwabara Takeo Prize for Underground
2006: World Fantasy Award (best novel) for Kafka on the Shore
2006: Frank O'Connor International Short Story Award for Blind Willow, Sleeping Woman
Murakami was also awarded the 2007 Kiriyama Prize for Fiction for his collection of short stories Blind Willow, Sleeping Woman, but according to the prize's official website, Murakami "declined to accept the award for reasons of personal principle".


=== Prizes for Murakami ===
In 2006, Murakami became the sixth recipient of the Franz Kafka Prize.
In September 2007, he received an honorary doctorate of Letters from the University of Liege, one from Princeton University in June 2008, and one from Tufts University in May 2014.
In January 2009 Murakami received the Jerusalem Prize, a biennial literary award given to writers whose work deals with themes of human freedom, society, politics, and government. There were protests in Japan and elsewhere against his attending the February award ceremony in Israel, including threats to boycott his work as a response against Israel's recent bombing of Gaza. Murakami chose to attend the ceremony, but gave a speech to the gathered Israeli dignitaries harshly criticizing Israeli policies. Murakami said, "Each of us possesses a tangible living soul. The system has no such thing. We must not allow the system to exploit us."
In 2011, Murakami donated his EU80,000 winnings from the International Catalunya Prize (from the Generalitat of Catalunya) to the victims of the March 11 earthquake and tsunami, and to those affected by the Fukushima nuclear disaster. Accepting the award, he said in his speech that the situation at the Fukushima plant was "the second major nuclear disaster that the Japanese people have experienced... however, this time it was not a bomb being dropped upon us, but a mistake committed by our very own hands." According to Murakami, the Japanese people should have rejected nuclear power after having "learned through the sacrifice of the hibakusha just how badly radiation leaves scars on the world and human wellbeing".
In recent years, Haruki Murakami has often been mentioned as a possible recipient of the Nobel Prize in Literature. Nonetheless, since all nomination records are sealed for 50 years from the awarding of the prize, it is pure speculation. When asked about the possibility of being awarded the Nobel Prize, Murakami responded with a laugh saying "No, I don't want prizes. That means you're finished."
In October 2014, he was awarded the Welt-Literaturpreis.
In April 2015, Murakami was named one of the TIME 100's most influential people.


== Films and other adaptations ==
Murakami's first novel Hear the Wind Sing (Kaze no uta o kike) was adapted by Japanese director Kazuki Omori. The film was released in 1981 and distributed by Art Theatre Guild. Naoto Yamakawa directed two short films Attack on the Bakery (released in 1982) and A Girl, She is 100 Percent (released in 1983), based on Murakami's short stories "The Second Bakery Attack" and "On Seeing the 100% Perfect Girl One Beautiful April Morning" respectively. Japanese director Jun Ichikawa adapted Murakami's short story "Tony Takitani" into a 75-minute feature. The film played at various film festivals and was released in New York and Los Angeles on July 29, 2005. The original short story, translated into English by Jay Rubin, is available in the April 15, 2002 issue of The New Yorker, as a stand-alone book published by Cloverfield Press, and part of Blind Willow, Sleeping Woman by Knopf. In 1998, the German film Der Eisbaer (Polar Bear), written and directed by Granz Henman, used elements of Murakami's short story "The Second Bakery Attack" in three intersecting story lines. "The Second Bakery Attack" was also adapted as a short film in 2010, directed by Carlos Cuaron, starring Kirsten Dunst.
Murakami's work was also adapted for the stage in a 2003 play entitled The Elephant Vanishes, co-produced by Britain's Complicite company and Japan's Setagaya Public Theatre. The production, directed by Simon McBurney, adapted three of Murakami's short stories and received acclaim for its unique blending of multimedia (video, music, and innovative sound design) with actor-driven physical theater (mime, dance, and even acrobatic wire work). On tour, the play was performed in Japanese, with supertitle translations for European and American audiences.
Two stories from Murakami's book after the quake--"Honey Pie" and "Superfrog Saves Tokyo"--have been adapted for the stage and directed by Frank Galati. Entitled after the quake, the play was first performed at the Steppenwolf Theatre Company in association with La Jolla Playhouse, and opened on October 12, 2007, at Berkeley Repertory Theatre. In 2008, Galati also adapted and directed a theatrical version of Kafka on the Shore, which first ran at Chicago's Steppenwolf Theatre Company from September to November.
On Max Richter's 2006 album Songs from Before, Robert Wyatt reads passages from Murakami's novels. In 2007, Robert Logevall adapted "All God's Children Can Dance" into a film, with a soundtrack composed by American jam band Sound Tribe Sector 9. In 2008, Tom Flint adapted "On Seeing the 100% Perfect Girl One Beautiful April Morning" into a short film. The film was screened at the 2008 CON-CAN Movie Festival. The film was viewed, voted, and commented upon as part of the audience award for the movie festival.
It was announced in July 2008 that French-Vietnamese director Tran Anh Hung would direct an adaptation of Murakami's novel, Norwegian Wood. The film was released in Japan on December 11, 2010.
In 2010, Stephen Earnhart adapted The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle into a 2-hour multimedia stage presentation. The show opened January 12, 2010, as part of the Public Theater's "Under the Radar" festival at the Ohio Theater in New York City, presented in association with The Asia Society and the Baryshnikov Arts Center. The show had its world premiere at the Edinburgh International Festival on August 21, 2011. The presentation incorporates live actors, video projection, traditional Japanese puppetry, and immersive soundscapes to render the surreal landscape of the original work.
Each short story in Murakami's after the quake collection was adapted into a six-song EP entitled .DC: JPN (after the quake 2011) in March 2011 following the 2011 Tohoku earthquake and tsunami to help benefit the relief efforts by musician Dre Carlan.


== Personal life ==
After receiving the Gunzo Award for his 1979 literary work Hear the Wind Sing, Murakami did not aspire to meet other writers. Aside from Princeton's Mary Morris, whom he briefly mentions in his memoir What I Talk About When I Talk About Running alongside Joyce Carol Oates and Toni Morrison, Murakami was never a part of a community of writers, his reason being that he was a loner and was never fond of groups, schools, and literary circles. When working on a book, Murakami states that he relies on his wife, who is always his first reader. While he never acquainted himself with many writers, Murakami enjoys the works of Ryu Murakami and Banana Yoshimoto.
Haruki Murakami is a fan of crime novels. During his high school days while living in Kobe, he would buy paperbacks from second hand book stores and learned to read English. The first book that he read in English was The Name is Archer, written by Ross Macdonald in 1955. Other writers he was interested in included Leo Tolstoy and Fyodor Dostoyevsky.
Murakami also has a passion for listening to music, especially classical and jazz. When he was around 14, he began to develop an interest in jazz. He later opened the Peter Cat, a coffeehouse and jazz bar. Murakami has said that music, like writing, is a mental journey. At one time he aspired to be a musician, but because he could not play instruments well he decided to become a writer instead.


== Bibliography ==
This is an incomplete bibliography as not all works published by Murakami in Japanese have been translated into English. Kanji titles are given with Hepburn romanization. (Original titles entirely in transcribed English are given as "katakana / romaji = English".)


=== Novels ===


=== Short stories ===
Most short stories have been collected in four volumes (three translated):
Other books include:
These stories were originally published individually in various magazines:


=== Essays and nonfiction ===
Murakami has published more than forty books of non-fiction. Among them are:


=== Translations ===
C. D. B. Bryan - The Great Dethriffe
Truman Capote - A Christmas Memory, One Christmas, Breakfast at Tiffany's, I Remember Grandpa, Children on Their Birthdays
Raymond Carver - All Works of Raymond Carver
Raymond Chandler - Farewell, My Lovely, The Long Goodbye,The Little Sister
Bill Crow - Jazz Anecdotes, From Birdland to Broadway
Terry Farish - The Cat Who Liked Potato Soup
F. Scott Fitzgerald - My Lost City, The Great Gatsby
Jim Fusilli - The Beach Boys' Pet Sounds
Mikal Gilmore - Shot in the Heart
Mark Helprin - Swan Lake
John Irving - Setting Free the Bears
Ursula K. Le Guin - Catwings, Catwings Return, Wonderful Alexander and the Catwings, Jane on her Own
Tim O'Brien - The Nuclear Age, The Things They Carried, July, July
Grace Paley - Enormous Changes at the Last Minute, The Little Disturbances of Man
J. D. Salinger - The Catcher in the Rye
Shel Silverstein - The Giving Tree
Mark Strand - Mr. and Mrs. Baby and Other Stories
Paul Theroux - World's End and Other Stories
Chris Van Allsburg - The Polar Express, The Wretched Stone, The Mysteries of Harris Burdick, Ben's Dream, Two Bad Ants, The Sweetest Fig, The Widow's Broom, The Stranger, The Wreck of the Zephyr, The Garden of Abdul Gasazi
Geoff Dyer - But Beautiful, A Book about Jazz


=== Translators of Murakami's works ===
Murakami's works have been translated into many languages. Below is a list of translators according to language (by alphabetical order):
Albanian - Etta Klosi
Arabic - Saeed Alganmi, Iman Harrz Allah
Armenian - Alexander Aghabekyan
Azerbaijani - Gunel Movlud
Basque - Ibon Uribarri
Bengali - Shahaduzzaman
Bulgarian - Ljudmil Ljutskanov, Dora Barova
Catalan - Albert Nolla, Concepcio Iribarren, Imma Estany, Jordi Mas Lopez
Chinese - Lai Ming Zhu  / Lai Ming-zhu (Taiwan); Lin Shao Hua  / Lin Shaohua, Shi Xiao Wei  / Shi Xiaowei (Chinese mainland); Xie Hui  / Ye Hui (Hong Kong)
Croatian - Maja Soljan, Vojo Sindolic, Mate Maras, Maja Tancik, Dinko Telecan
Czech - Tomas Jurkovic, Klara Macuchova
Danish - Mette Holm
Dutch - Elbrich Fennema, Jacques Westerhoven, L. van Haute
English - Alfred Birnbaum, Jay Rubin, Philip Gabriel, Hideo Levy (USA); Theodore W. Goossen (Canada)
Estonian - Kati Lindstrom, Kristina Uluots
Faroese - Pauli Nielsen
Finnish - Leena Tamminen, Ilkka Malinen, Juhani Lindholm, Raisa Porrasmaa
French - Corinne Atlan, Helene Morita, Patrick De Vos, Veronique Brindeau, Karine Chesneau, Rose-Marie Makino-Fayolle, Dominique Letellier
Galician - Mona Imai, Gabriel Alvarez Martinez
Georgian - Irakli Beriashvili; Janri and Luiza Lodeshvili; Tamar Subeliani
German - Ursula Grafe, Nora Bierich, Sabine Mangold, Jurgen Stalph, Annelie Ortmanns
Greek - Maria Aggelidou, Thanasis Douvris, Leonidas Karatzas, Juri Kovalenko, Stelios Papazafeiropoulos, Giorgos Voudiklaris
Hebrew - Einat Cooper, Dr. Michal Daliot-Bul, Yonatan Friedman (from English)
Hungarian - Erdos Gyorgy, Horvath Kriszta, Komaromy Rudolf, Nagy Monika, Nagy Anita
Icelandic - Uggi Jonsson
Indonesian - Jonjon Johana
Italian - Giorgio Amitrano, Antonietta Pastore, Mimma De Petra
Korean - Kim Choon-Mie, Kim Nanjoo
Latvian - Inguna Bekere, Inese Avana
Lithuanian - Milda Dyke, Irena Jomantiene, Jurate Nauronaite, Marius Daskus, Dalia Saukaityte, Ieva Stasiunaite, Ieva Susnyte
Norwegian - Ika Kaminka, Kari and Kjell Risvik
Persian - Gita Garakani, Mehdi Ghabraee, Bozorgmehr Sharafoddin
Polish - Anna Horikoshi, Anna Zielinska-Elliott
Portuguese - Maria Joao Lourenco (Portugal); Ana Luiza Dantas Borges, Leiko Gotoda, Lica Hashimoto (Brazilian Portuguese)
Romanian - Angela Hondru, Silvia Cercheaza, Andreea Sion, Iuliana Tomescu
Russian - Dmitry V. Kovalenin, Vadim Smolensky, Ivan Logatchev, Sergey Logatchev, Andrey Zamilov, Natalya Kunikova
Serbian - Natasa Tomic, Divna Tomic
Slovak - Dana Hashimoto, Lucia Kruzlikova
Slovene - Nika Cejan, Aleksander Mermal
Spanish - Lourdes Porta, Junichi Matsuura, Fernando Rodriguez-Izquierdo, Francisco Barberan, Albert Nolla, Gabriel Alvarez
Swedish - Yukiko Duke, Eiko Duke, Vibeke Emond
Thai - Noppadol Vatsawat, Komsan Nantachit, Tomorn Sukprecha
Turkish - Pinar Polat, Nihal Onol, Huseyin Can Erkin
Ukrainian - Ivan Dziub, Oleksandr Bibko
Vietnamese - Trinh Lu, Tran Tien Cao Dang, Duong Tuong, Cao Viet Dung, Pham Xuan Nguyen, Luc Huong, Pham Vu Thinh


== See also ==


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Pintor, Ivan. "David Lynch y Haruki Murakami, la llama en el umbral," in: VV.AA., Universo Lynch. Internacional Sitges Film Festival-Calamar, 2007 (ISBN 84-96235-16-5)
Rubin, Jay. Haruki Murakami and the Music of Words. Harvill Press, 2002 (ISBN 1-86046-952-3)
Strecher, Matthew Carl. The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle Readers Guide. Continuum Pub Group, 2002 (ISBN 0-8264-5239-6)
Strecher, Matthew Carl. Dances with Sheep: The Quest for Identity in the Fiction of Murakami Haruki. University of Michigan/Monographs in Japanese Studies, 2001. (ISBN 1-929280-07-6)
Suter, Rebecca. The Japanization of Modernity: Murakami Haruki Between Japan and the United States. Harvard University Asian Center, 2008. (ISBN 978-0-674-02833-3)


== External links ==
Haruki Murakami at Random House
Haruki Murakami at The New Yorker (online essays, stories, excerpts)
Haruki Murakami at The New York Times (articles about, interviews with)
Haruki Murakami at Complete Review (international meta-reviews)
Haruki Murakami at the Internet Book List
Haruki Murakami at The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction
Haruki Murakami at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Interviews
"Haruki Murakami: The Outsider" (by Laura Miller and Don George), Salon, December 1997 (about Wind-Up Bird and Underground)
"Haruki Murakami, The Art of Fiction No. 182" (by John Wray), The Paris Review, Summer 2004
Articles
"The reception of Murakami Haruki in Taiwan" (PDF), Yale University
"Haruki Murakami: How a Japanese writer conquered the world" (by Stephanie Hegarty), BBC News, October 17, 2011
"The 10 Best Haruki Murakami Books" (by Murakami scholar Matthew C. Strecher), Publishers Weekly, August 8, 2014
Fan resources
Exorcising Ghosts - Haruki Murakami resources (bibliography, adaptations, press review)
About the music from Haruki Murakami books
(Japanese) Japanese fan's website
Multimedia
Video about Murakami's life and work at Psychology Today's blog The Literary Mind