Hugo Rafael Chavez Frias (Spanish pronunciation: ['ugo rafa'el 'tSabes 'fri.as]; 28 July 1954 - 5 March 2013) was a Venezuelan politician and the President of Venezuela from 1999 until his death in 2013. He was the leader of the Fifth Republic Movement from its foundation in 1997 until 2007, when it merged with several other parties to form the United Socialist Party of Venezuela (PSUV), which he led until 2012.
Born into a working-class family in Sabaneta, Barinas, Chavez became a career military officer, and after becoming dissatisfied with the Venezuelan political system based on the Punto Fijo Pact, he founded the clandestine Revolutionary Bolivarian Movement-200 (MBR-200) in the early 1980s. Chavez led the MBR-200 in an unsuccessful coup d'etat against the Democratic Action government of President Carlos Andres Perez in 1992, for which he was imprisoned. Released from prison after two years, he founded a political party known as the Fifth Republic Movement and was elected president of Venezuela in 1998. He was re-elected in 2000 and again in 2006 with over 60% of the vote. After winning his fourth term as president in the October 2012 presidential election, he was to be sworn in on 10 January 2013, but Venezuela's National Assembly postponed the inauguration to allow him time to recover from medical treatment in Cuba. Suffering a return of the cancer originally diagnosed in June 2011, Chavez died in Caracas on 5 March 2013 at the age of 58.
Following the adoption of a new constitution in 1999, Chavez focused on enacting social reforms as part of the Bolivarian Revolution. Using record-high oil revenues of the 2000s, his government nationalized key industries, created participatory democratic Communal Councils, and implemented social programs known as the Bolivarian Missions to expand access to food, housing, healthcare, and education. This led to improvements in areas such as poverty, literacy, income equality, and quality of life. Going into the 2010s, economic actions performed by Chavez's government over the previous decade such as overspending and price controls proved to be unsustainable and caused the economy to falter, with inflation, poverty and shortages in Venezuela increasing. Chavez's presidency also saw significant increases in the country's murder rate and corruption within the police force and government. His use of enabling acts and his government's use of Bolivarian propaganda was also controversial.
Internationally, Chavez aligned himself with the Marxist-Leninist governments of Fidel and then Raul Castro in Cuba, and the socialist governments of Evo Morales (Bolivia), Rafael Correa (Ecuador), and Daniel Ortega (Nicaragua). His presidency was seen as a part of the socialist "pink tide" sweeping Latin America. Chavez described his policies as anti-imperialist, being a prominent adversary of the United States's foreign policy as well as a vocal critic of US-supported neoliberalism and laissez-faire capitalism. He described himself as a Marxist. He supported Latin American and Caribbean cooperation and was instrumental in setting up the pan-regional Union of South American Nations, the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas, the Bank of the South, and the regional television network TeleSUR. Chavez's ideas, programs, and style form the basis of "Chavismo", a political ideology closely associated with Bolivarianism and Socialism of the 21st Century.


== Early life ==


=== Childhood ===

Hugo Chavez was born on 28 July 1954 in his paternal grandmother Rosa Inez Chavez's home, a modest three-room house located in the rural village Sabaneta, Barinas State. The Chavez family were of Amerindian, Afro-Venezuelan, and Spanish descent. His parents, Hugo de los Reyes Chavez and Elena Frias de Chavez, were schoolteachers who lived in the small village of Los Rastrojos.
Hugo was born the second of seven children. The couple lived in poverty and sent Hugo and his older brother Adan to live with their grandmother Rosa, whom Hugo later described as being "a pure human being... pure love, pure kindness." She was a devout Roman Catholic, and Hugo was an altar boy at a local church. Hugo described his childhood as "poor... [but] very happy".
Attending the Julian Pino Elementary School, Chavez was particularly interested in the 19th-century federalist general Ezequiel Zamora, in whose army his own great-great-grandfather had served. In the mid-1960s, Hugo, his brother and their grandmother moved to the city of Barinas so that the boys could attend Daniel O'Leary High School.


=== Military Academy: 1971-1975 ===
Aged seventeen, Chavez studied at the Venezuelan Academy of Military Sciences in Caracas, following a curriculum known as the Andres Bello Plan, instituted by a group of progressive, nationalistic military officers. This new curriculum encouraged students to learn not only military routines and tactics but also a wide variety of other topics, and to do so civilian professors were brought in from other universities to give lectures to the military cadets.

Living in Caracas, he saw more of the endemic poverty faced by working class Venezuelans, and said that this experience only made him further committed to achieving social justice. He also began to get involved in activities outside of the military school, playing baseball and softball with the Criollitos de Venezuela team, progressing with them to the Venezuelan National Baseball Championships. He also wrote poetry, fiction, and drama, and painted, and he researched the life and political thought of 19th-century South American revolutionary Simon Bolivar. He also became interested in the Marxist revolutionary Che Guevara (1928-67) after reading his memoir The Diary of Che Guevara. In 1974, he was selected to be a representative in the commemorations for the 150th anniversary of the Battle of Ayacucho in Peru, the conflict in which Simon Bolivar's lieutenant, Antonio Jose de Sucre, defeated royalist forces during the Peruvian War of Independence. In Peru, Chavez heard the leftist president, General Juan Velasco Alvarado (1910-1977), speak, and inspired by Velasco's ideas that the military should act in the interests of the working classes when the ruling classes were perceived as corrupt, he "drank up the books [Velasco had written], even memorising some speeches almost completely."
Befriending the son of Panamanian President Omar Torrijos (1929-1981), another leftist military general, Chavez visited Panama, where he met with Torrijos, and was impressed with his land reform program that was designed to benefit the peasants. Influenced by Torrijos and Velasco he saw the potential for military generals to seize control of a government when the civilian authorities were perceived as serving the interests of only the wealthy elites. In contrast to Torrijos and Velasco, Chavez became highly critical of Augusto Pinochet, the right-wing general who had recently seized control in Chile with the aid of the American CIA. Chavez later said, "With Torrijos, I became a Torrijist. With Velasco I became a Velasquist. And with Pinochet, I became an anti-Pinochetist". In 1975, Chavez graduated from the military academy as one of the top graduates of the year.


=== Early military career: 1976-1981 ===

Following his graduation, Chavez was stationed as a communications officer at a counterinsurgency unit in Barinas, although the Marxist-Leninist insurgency which the army was sent to combat had already been eradicated from that state. At one point he found a stash of Marxist literature that apparently had belonged to insurgents many years before. He went on to read these books, which included titles by Karl Marx, Vladimir Lenin and Mao Zedong, but his favourite was a work entitled The Times of Ezequiel Zamora, written about the 19th-century federalist general whom Chavez had admired as a child. These books further convinced Chavez of the need for a leftist government in Venezuela: "By the time I was 21 or 22, I made myself a man of the left".
In 1977, Chavez's unit was transferred to Anzoategui, where they were involved in battling the Red Flag Party, a Marxist-Hoxhaist insurgency group. After intervening to prevent the beating of an alleged insurgent by other soldiers, Chavez began to have his doubts about the army and their methods in using torture. At the same time, he was becoming increasingly critical of the corruption in the army and in the civilian government, coming to believe Venezuela's poor were not benefiting from the oil wealth, and began to sympathize with the Red Flag Party and their cause and their violent methods.
In 1977, he founded a revolutionary movement together with Luis R. Gonzalez an William Jimenez, within the armed forces, in the hope that he could one day introduce a leftist government to Venezuela: the Venezuelan People's Liberation Army (Ejercito de Liberacion del Pueblo de Venezuela, or ELPV), consisted of him and a handful of his fellow soldiers who had no immediate plans for direct action, though they knew they wanted a middle way between the right wing policies of the government and the far left position of the Red Flag. Nevertheless, hoping to gain an alliance with civilian leftist groups in Venezuela, Chavez set up clandestine meetings with various prominent Marxists, including Alfredo Maneiro (the founder of the Radical Cause) and Douglas Bravo. At this time, Chavez married a working-class woman named Nancy Colmenares, with whom he had three children: Rosa Virginia (born September 1978), Maria Gabriela (born March 1980) and Hugo Rafael (born October 1983).


== Later military career and the Bolivarian Revolutionary Army-200: 1982-1991 ==

Five years after his creation of the ELPV, Chavez went on to form a new secretive cell within the military, the Bolivarian Revolutionary Army-200 (EBR-200), later redesignated the Revolutionary Bolivarian Movement-200 (MBR-200). He was inspired by Ezequiel Zamora (1817-1860), Simon Bolivar (1783-1830) and Simon Rodriguez (1769-1854), who became known as the "three roots of the tree" of the MBR-200. Later, Chavez said that "the Bolivarian movement that was being born did not propose political objectives... Its goals were imminently internal. Its efforts were directed in the first place to studying the military history of Venezuela as a source of a military doctrine of our own, which up to then didn't exist". However, he always hoped for the Bolivarian Movement to become a politically dominant party that would "accept all kinds of ideas, from the right, from the left, from the ideological ruins of those old capitalist and communist systems." Indeed, Irish political analyst Barry Cannon noted that the MBR's early ideology "was a doctrine in construction, a heterogeneous amalgam of thoughts and ideologies, from universal thought, capitalism, Marxism, but rejecting the neoliberal models currently being imposed in Latin America and the discredited models of the old Soviet Bloc."
In 1981, Chavez, by now a captain, was assigned to teach at the military academy where he had formerly trained. Here he introduced new students to his so-called "Bolivarian" ideals and recruited some of them. By the time they had graduated, at least thirty out of 133 cadets had joined his cause. In 1984 he met Herma Marksman, a recently divorced history teacher with whom he had an affair that lasted several years. During this time Francisco Arias Cardenas , a soldier interested in liberation theology, also joined MBR-200. Cardenas rose to a significant position within the group, although he came into ideological conflict with Chavez, with Chavez believing that they should begin direct military action in order to overthrow the government, something Cardenas thought was reckless.
After some time, some senior military officers became suspicious of Chavez and reassigned him so that he would not be able to gain any more fresh new recruits from the academy. He was sent to take command of the remote barracks at Elorza in Apure State, where he organized social events for the community and contacted the local indigenous tribal peoples, the Cuiva and Yaruro. Distrustful as they were because of the mistreatment at the hands of the Venezuelan army in previous decades, Chavez gained their trust by joining the expeditions of an anthropologist to meet with them. Chavez said his experiences with them later led him to introduce laws protecting the rights of indigenous tribal peoples. In 1988, after being promoted to the rank of major, the high-ranking General Rodriguez Ochoa took a liking to Chavez and employed him to be his assistant at his office in Caracas.


=== Operation Zamora coup attempt: 1992 ===

In 1989, centrist Carlos Andres Perez (1922-2010) was elected President, and though he had promised to oppose the United States government's Washington Consensus and the International Monetary Fund's policies, he opposed neither once he got into office, following instead the neoliberal economic policies supported by the United States and the IMF, angering the public. In an attempt to stop the widespread protests and looting that followed his social spending cuts, Perez initiated Plan Avila and a violent repression of protesters, known as El Caracazo unfolded. Though members of Chavez's MBR-200 movement had allegedly participated in the crackdown, Chavez did not participate since he was then hospitalized with chicken pox and later condemned the event as "genocide".
Chavez began preparing for a military coup d'etat known as Operation Zamora. The plan involved inside members of the military, the overwhelming of military locations along with communication installations and the establishment of Rafael Caldera in power following the capture and assassination of President Perez. Initially prepared for December, Chavez delayed the MBR-200 coup until the early twilight hours of 4 February 1992.
On that date, five army units under Chavez's command moved into urban Caracas. Despite years of planning, the coup quickly encountered trouble since Chavez could command the loyalty of less than 10% of Venezuela's military forces. After numerous betrayals, defections, errors, and other unforeseen circumstances, Chavez and a small group of rebels found themselves hiding in the Military Museum, unable to communicate with other members with Perez managing to escape Miraflores Palace. Fourteen soldiers were killed, and fifty soldiers and some eighty civilians injured during the ensuing violence. Another unsuccessful coup against the government occurred in November, with the fighting during the coups resulting in the deaths of at least 143 people and perhaps as many as several hundred.

Chavez gave himself up to the government and appeared on television, in uniform, to call on remaining coup members to lay down their arms. Many viewers noted that Chavez in his speech had remarked that he had failed only "por ahora" (for now), and many Venezuelans, particularly poor ones, began seeing him as someone who stood up against government corruption and kleptocracy.
Chavez was arrested and imprisoned at the San Carlos military stockade, where he remained wracked with guilt, feeling responsible for the coup's failure. Pro-Chavez demonstrations that took place outside of San Carlos led to his being transferred to Yare prison soon after. The government meanwhile began a temporary crackdown on media supportive of Chavez and the coup. Perez himself was then impeached a year later for malfeasance and misappropriation of funds for illegal activities.


== Political rise: 1992-1998 ==

While Chavez and the other senior members of the MBR-200 were in prison, his relationship with Herma Marksman broke up in July 1993. In 1994, Rafael Caldera (1916-2009) of the centrist National Convergence Party and who had knowledge of the coup was elected president, and soon after freed Chavez and the other imprisoned MBR-200 members, though Caldera banned them from returning to the military. Chavez went on a 100-day tour of the country, promoting his Bolivarian cause of social revolution. On his tours around the country he met Marisabel Rodriguez, who would give birth to their daughter shortly before becoming his second wife in 1997.
Travelling around Latin America in search of foreign support for his Bolivarian movement, he visited Argentina, Uruguay, Chile, Colombia, and finally Cuba, where he met Castro and became friends with him. After his return to Venezuela, Chavez was critical of President Caldera and his neoliberal economic policies. A drop in per capita income, coupled with increases in poverty and crime, "led to gaps emerging between rulers and ruled which favoured the emergence of a populist leader".
By now Chavez was a supporter of taking military action, believing that the oligarchy would never allow him and his supporters to win an election, while Francisco Arias Cardenas insisted that they take part in the representative democratic process. Indeed, Cardenas soon joined the Radical Cause socialist party and won the December 1995 election to become governor of the oil-rich Zulia State. As a result, Chavez and his supporters founded a political party, the Fifth Republic Movement (MVR - Movimiento Quinta Republica) in July 1997 in order to support Chavez's candidature in the Venezuelan presidential election, 1998.


=== 1998 election ===
At the start of the election run-up, front runner Irene Saez was backed by one of Venezuela's two primary political parties, Copei. Chavez's revolutionary rhetoric gained him support from Patria Para Todos (Fatherland for All), the Partido Comunist Venezolano (Venezeuelan Communist Party) and the Movimiento al Socialismo (Movement for Socialism). Chavez's promises of widespread social and economic reforms won the trust and favor of a primarily poor and working class. By May 1998, Chavez's support had risen to 30% in polls, and by August he was registering 39%. With his support increasing, and Saez's decreasing, both the main two political parties, Copei and Democratic Action, put their support behind Henrique Salas Romer, a Yale University-educated economist who represented the Project Venezuela party.
Voter turnout in the election is the subject of dispute. Voter turnout was at 63.45%, with Chavez winning the election with 56.20% of the vote. Academic analysis of the election showed that Chavez's support had come primarily from the country's poor and the "disenchanted middle class", whose standard of living had decreased rapidly in the previous decade, and much of the middle and upper class vote went Romer.


== Presidency: 1999-2013 ==


=== First presidential term: 2 February 1999 - 10 January 2001 ===
Chavez's presidential inauguration took place on 2 February 1999, and during the usual presidential oath he deviated from the prescribed words to proclaim that "I swear before God and my people that upon this moribund constitution I will drive forth the necessary democratic transformations so that the new republic will have a Magna Carta befitting these new times." He appointed new figures to a number of government posts, including promoting various leftist allies to key positions; he for instance gave one of the founders of MBR, Jesus Urdaneta, the position in charge of the Bolivarian Intelligence Agency; and made one of the 1992 coup leaders, Hernan Gruber Odreman, governor of the Federal District of Caracas. Chavez also appointed some conservative, centrist and centre-right figures to government positions as well, reappointing Caldera's economy minister Maritza Izaquirre to that same position and also appointing the businessman Roberto Mandini to be president of the state-run oil company Petroleos de Venezuela. His critics referred to this group of government officials as the "Boliburguesia" or "Bolivarian bourgeoisie", and highlighted the fact that it "included few people with experience in public administration." The involvement of a number of his immediate family members in Venezuelan politics led to accusations of nepotism. In June 2000 he separated from his wife Marisabel, and their divorce was finalised in January 2004.
The Chavez government's initial policies were moderate, capitalist and centre-left, having much in common with those of contemporary Latin American leftists like Brazil's president Lula da Silva. Chavez initially believed that capitalism was still a valid economic model for Venezuela, but only Rhenish capitalism, not the US-supported neoliberalism of former governments. He followed the economic guidelines recommended by the International Monetary Fund and continued to encourage foreign corporations to invest in Venezuela, even visiting the New York Stock Exchange in the United States in an attempt to convince wealthy investors to do so.
Chavez set into motion a social welfare program called Plan Bolivar 2000, which he organised to begin on 27 February 1999, the tenth anniversary of the Caracazo massacre. Chavez said he would set aside $20.8 million for the plan, though some state that the program costed $113 million. Plan Bolivar 2000 involved 70,000 soldiers, sailors and members of the air force going out into the streets of Venezuela where they would repair roads and hospitals, remove stagnant water that offered breeding areas for disease-carrying mosquitoes, offer free medical care and vaccinations, and sell food at low prices.
In May 2000 he launched his own Sunday morning radio show, Alo Presidente (Hello, President), on the state radio network, as well as a Thursday night television show, De Frente con el Presidente (Face to Face with the President). He followed this with his own newspaper, El Correo del Presidente (The President's Post), founded in July, for which he acted as editor-in-chief, but which was later shut amidst accusations of corruption in its management. In his television and radio shows, he answered calls from citizens, discussed his latest policies, sang songs and told jokes, making it unique not only in Latin America but the entire world.


==== Constitutional reform ====
Chavez then called for a public referendum which he hoped would support his plans to form a constitutional assembly, composed of representatives from across Venezuela, as well as from indigenous tribal groups, which would be able to rewrite the nation's constitution. The referendum went ahead on 25 April 1999, and was an overwhelming success for Chavez, with 88% of voters supporting the proposal.

Then Chavez called for an election to take place on 25 July, in which the members of the constitutional assembly would be voted into power. Of the 1,171 candidates standing for election to the assembly, over 900 of them were opponents of Chavez. Despite the large number of opposition candidates, Chavez's supporters won another overwhelming electoral victory creating "a very pro-Chavez Constitutional Assembly", with his supporters taking 125 seats (95% of the total), including all of those belonging to indigenous tribal groups, whereas the opposition were voted into only 6 seats.
On 12 August 1999, the new constitutional assembly voted to give themselves the power to abolish government institutions and to dismiss officials who were perceived as being corrupt or operating only in their own interests. Opponents of the Chavez regime argued that it was therefore dictatorial. Most jurists believed that the new constitutional assembly became the country's "supreme authority" and that all other institutions were subordinate to it. The assembly also declared a "judicial emergency", granting itself the power to overhaul the judicial system. The Supreme Court, which ruled that the assembly did indeed have such authority, was eventually replaced by the 1999 Constitution, which created the "Supreme Tribunal of Justice" in its place.
The elected members of the constituent assembly put together a new constitution, and a referendum on the issue of whether to adopt it was held in December 1999; the referendum saw an abstention vote of over 50%, although among those voting, 72% approved the new constitution's adoption. The constitution gave greater powers to the president, not only by extending their term but also by giving them the power to legislate on citizen rights as well as the economic and financial matters that they were formerly unable to do. It also gave the military a role in the government by providing it with the mandated role of ensuring public order and aiding national development, something it had been expressely forbidden from doing under the former constitution. As a part of the new constitution, the country, which was then officially known as the Republic of Venezuela, was renamed the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (Republica Bolivariana de Venezuela) at Chavez's request.


=== Second presidential term: 10 January 2001 - 10 January 2007 ===

Under the new constitution, it was legally required that new elections be held in order to re-legitimize the government and president. This presidential election in July 2000 would be a part of a greater "megaelection", the first time in the country's history that the president, governors, national and regional congressmen, mayors and councilmen would be voted for on the same day. Going into the elections, Chavez had control of all three branches of government. For the position of president, Chavez's closest challenger proved to be his former friend and co-conspirator in the 1992 coup, Francisco Arias Cardenas, who since becoming governor of Zulia state had turned towards the political centre and begun to denounce Chavez as autocratic. Although some of his supporters feared that he had alienated those in the middle class and the Roman Catholic Church hierarchy who had formerly supported him, Chavez was re-elected with 59.76% of the vote (the equivalent of 3,757,000 people), a larger majority than his 1998 electoral victory, again primarily receiving his support from the poorer sectors of Venezuelan society.
That year, Chavez helped to further cement his geopolitical and ideological ties with the Cuban government of Fidel Castro by signing an agreement under which Venezuela would supply Cuba with 53,000 barrels of oil per day at preferential rates, in return receiving 20,000 trained Cuban medics and educators. In the ensuing decade, this would be increased to 90,000 barrels a day (in exchange for 40,000 Cuban medics and teachers), dramatically aiding the Caribbean island's economy and standard of living after its "Special Period" of the 1990s. However, Venezuela's growing alliance with Cuba came at the same time as a deteriorating relationship with the United States: in late 2001, just after the American-led invasion of Afghanistan in retaliation for 11 September attacks against the U.S. by Islamist militants, Chavez showed pictures of Afghan children killed in a bomb attack on his television show. He commented that "They are not to blame for the terrorism of Osama Bin Laden or anyone else", and called on the American government to end "the massacre of the innocents. Terrorism cannot be fought with terrorism." The U.S. government responded negatively to the comments, which were picked up by the media worldwide.

Meanwhile, the 2000 elections had led to Chavez's supporters gaining 101 out of 165 seats in the Venezuelan National Assembly, and so in November 2001 they voted to allow him to pass 49 social and economic decrees. This move antagonized the opposition movement particularly strongly.
At the start of the 21st century, Venezuela was the world's fifth largest exporter of crude oil, with oil accounting for 85.3% of the country's exports, therefore dominating the country's economy. Previous administrations had sought to privatise this industry, with U.S. corporations having a significant level of control, but the Chavez administration wished to curb this foreign control over the country's natural resources by nationalising much of it under the state-run oil company, Petroleos de Venezuela S.A. (PdVSA). In 2001, the government introduced a new Hydrocarbons Law through which they sought to gain greater state control over the oil industry: they did this by raising royalty taxes on the oil companies and also by introducing the formation of "mixed companies", whereby the PdVSA could have joint control with private companies over industry. By 2006, all of the 32 operating agreements signed with private corporations during the 1990s had been converted from being primarily or solely corporate-run to being at least 51% controlled by PdVSA.


==== Opposition and the CD ====
During Chavez's first term in office, the opposition movement had been "strong but reasonably contained, [with] complaints centering mainly on procedural aspects of the implementation of the constitution".
The first organized protest against the Bolivarian government occurred in January 2001, when the Chavez administration tried to implement educational reforms through the proposed Resolution 259 and Decree 1.011, which would have seen the publication of textbooks with a heavy Bolivarian bias. The protest movement, which was primarily by middle class parents whose children went to privately run schools, marched to central Caracas shouting out the slogan "Don't mess with my children." Although the protesters were denounced by Chavez, who called them "selfish and individualistic," the protest was successful enough for the government to retract the proposed education reforms and instead enter into a consensus-based educational program with the opposition.
Later into 2001, an organization known as the Coordinadora Democratica de Accion Civica (CD) was founded, under which the Venezuelan opposition political parties, corporate powers, most of the country's media, the Venezuelan Federation of Chambers of Commerce, the Frente Institucional Militar and the Central Workers Union all united to oppose Chavez's regime. The prominent businessman Pedro Carmona (1941-) was chosen as the CD's leader. They received support from various foreign sources.

The CD and other opponents of Chavez's Bolivarian government accused it of trying to turn Venezuela from a democracy into a dictatorship by centralising power amongst its supporters in the Constituent Assembly and granting Chavez increasingly autocratic powers. Many of them pointed to Chavez's personal friendship with Cuba's Fidel Castro and the one-party socialist government in Cuba as a sign of where the Bolivarian government was taking Venezuela. Others did not hold such a strong view but still argued that Chavez was a "free-spending, authoritarian populist" whose policies were detrimental to the country.


==== Coup, strikes and the recall referendum ====

On 11 April 2002, during mass protests in Caracas against the Bolivarian government, twenty people were killed, and over 110 were wounded. A group of high-ranking anti-Chavez military officers had been planning to launch a coup against Chavez and used the civil unrest as an opportunity. After the plotters gained significant power, Chavez agreed to be detained and was transferred by army escort to La Orchila; business leader Pedro Carmona declared himself president of an interim government. Carmona abolished the 1999 constitution and appointed a small governing committee to run the country. Protests in support of Chavez along with insufficient support for Carmona's regime, which many felt was implementing totalitarian measures, quickly led to Carmona's resignation, and Chavez was returned to power on 15 April.
Chavez's response was to moderate his approach, implementing a new economic team that appeared to be more centrist and reinstated the old board of directors and managers of the state oil company Petroleos de Venezuela S.A. (PDVSA), whose replacement had been one of the reasons for the coup. At the same time, the Bolivarian government began increased the country's military capacity, purchasing 100,000 AK-47 assault rifles and several helicopters from Russia, as well as a number of Super Tucano light attack and training planes from Brazil. Troop numbers were also increased.
In 2002, after appointing political allies to head the PDVSA and replacing the company's board of directors with loyalists who had "little or no experience in the oil industry", Chavez faced a two-month management strike at the PDVSA. The Chavez government's response was to fire about 19,000 striking employees for illegally abandoning their posts and then employing retired workers, foreign contractors, and the military to do their jobs instead. According to one observer, this move further damaged the strength of Chavez's opposition by removing the many managers in the oil industry who had been supportive of their cause to overthrow Chavez.
The 1999 constitution had introduced the concept of a recall referendum into Venezuelan politics, so the opposition called for such a referendum to take place. A 2004 referendum to recall Chavez was defeated. 70% of the eligible Venezuelan population turned out to vote, with 59% of voters deciding to keep the president in power. Unlike his original 1998 election victory, this time Chavez's electoral support came almost entirely from the poorer working classes rather than the middle classes, who "had practically abandoned Chavez" after he "had consistently moved towards the left in those five and a half years".


==== "Socialism of the 21st century" ====
The various attempts at overthrowing the Bolivarian government from power had only served to further radicalize Chavez. In January 2005, he began openly proclaiming the ideology of "Socialism of the 21st Century", something that was distinct from his earlier forms of Bolivarianism, which had been social democratic in nature, merging elements of capitalism and socialism. He used this new term to contrast the democratic socialism, which he wanted to promote in Latin America from the Marxist-Leninist socialism that had been spread by socialist states like the Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China during the 20th century, arguing that the latter had not been truly democratic, suffering from a lack of participatory democracy and an excessively authoritarian governmental structure.
In May 2006, Chavez visited Europe in a private capacity, where he announced plans to supply cheap Venezuelan oil to poor working class communities in the continent. The Mayor of London Ken Livingstone welcomed him, describing him as "the best news out of Latin America in many years".


=== Third presidential term: 10 January 2007 - 10 January 2013 ===
In the presidential election of December 2006, which saw a 74% voter turnout, Chavez was once more elected, this time with 63% of the vote, beating his closest challenger Manuel Rosales, who conceded his loss. The election was certified as being free and legitimate by the Organization of American States (OAS) and the Carter Center. After this victory, Chavez promised an "expansion of the revolution."


==== United Socialist Party of Venezuela and domestic policy ====
On 15 December 2006, Chavez publicly announced that those leftist political parties who had continually supported him in the Patriotic Pole would unite into one single, much larger party, the United Socialist Party of Venezuela (Partido Socialista Unido de Venezuela, PSUV). In the speech which he gave announcing the PSUV's creation, Chavez declared that the old parties must "forget their own structures, party colours and slogans, because they are not the most important thing for the fatherland." According to political analyst Barry Cannon, the purpose of creating the PSUV was to "forge unity amongst the disparate elements [of the Bolivarian movement], providing grassroots input into policy and leadership formation, [and] uniting the grassroots and leadership into one single body." It was hoped that by doing so, it would decrease the problems of clientelism and corruption and also leave the movement less dependent on its leadership: as Chavez himself declared, "In this new party, the bases will elect the leaders. This will allow real leaders to emerge."

Chavez had initially proclaimed that those leftist parties which chose to not dissolve into the PSUV would have to leave the government, however, after several of those parties supporting him refused to do so, he ceased to issue such threats. There was initially much grassroots enthusiasm for the creation of the PSUV, with membership having risen to 5.7 million people by 2007, making it the largest political group in Venezuela. The United Nations' International Labour Organization however expressed concern over some voters' being pressured to join the party.
In 2007, the Bolivarian government set up a constitutional commission in order to review the 1999 constitution and suggest potential amendments to be made to it. Led by the prominent pro-Chavez intellectual Luis Britto Garcia, the commission came to the conclusion that the constitution could include more socially progressive clauses, such as the shortening of the working week, a constitutional recognition of Afro Venezuelans and the elimination of discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation. It also suggested measures that would have increased many of the president's powers, for instance increasing the presidential term limit to seven years, allowing the president to run for election indefinitely and centralizing powers in the executive. The government put the suggested changes to a public referendum in December 2007. Abstention rate was high however, with 43.95% of registered voters not turning out, and in the end the proposed changes were rejected by 50.65% of votes. This would prove to the first electoral loss that Chavez had faced in the thirteen electoral contests held since he took power, something analysts argued was due to the top-down nature of the changes, as well as general public dissatisfaction with "the absence of internal debate on its content, as well as dissatisfaction with the running of the social programmes, increasing street crime, and with corruption within the government."
In order to ensure that his Bolivarian Revolution became socially engrained in Venezuela, Chavez discussed his wish to stand for re-election when his term ran out in 2013, and spoke of ruling beyond 2030. Under the 1999 constitution, he could not legally stand for re-election again, and so brought about a referendum on 15 February 2009 to abolish the two-term limit for all public offices, including the presidency. Approximately 70% of the Venezuelan electorate voted, and they approved this alteration to the constitution with over 54% in favor, allowing any elected official the chance to try to run indefinitely.


=== Fourth presidential term: 10 January 2013 - 5 March 2013 ===
On 7 October 2012, Chavez won election as president for a fourth time, his third six-year term. He defeated Henrique Capriles with 54% of the votes versus 45% for Capriles, which was a lower victory margin than in his previous presidential wins, in the 2012 Venezuelan presidential election Turnout in the election was 80%, with a hotly contested election between the two candidates. There was significant support for Chavez amongst the Venezuelan lower class. Chavez's opposition blamed him for unfairly using state funds to spread largesse before the election to bolster Chavez's support among his primary electoral base, the lower class.

The inauguration of Chavez's new term was scheduled for 10 January 2013, but as he was undergoing medical treatment at the time in Cuba, he was not able to return to Venezuela for that date. The National Assembly president Diosdado Cabello proposed to postpone the inauguration and the Supreme Court decided that, being just another term of the sitting president and not the inauguration of a new one, the formality could be bypassed. The Venezuelan Bishops Conference opposed the verdict, stating that the constitution must be respected and the Venezuelan government had not been transparent regarding details about Chavez's health.
Acting executive officials produced orders of government signed by Chavez, which were suspected of forgery by some opposition politicians, who claimed that Chavez was too sick to be in control of his faculties. Guillermo Cochez, recently dismissed from the office of Panamanian ambassador to the Organization of American States, even claimed that Chavez had been brain-dead since 31 December 2012. Near to Chavez's death, two American attaches were expelled from the country for allegedly undermining Venezuelan democracy.
Due to the death of Chavez, Vice President Nicolas Maduro took over the presidential powers and duties for the remainder of Chavez's abbreviated term until presidential elections were held. Venezuela's constitution specifies that the speaker of the National Assembly, Diosdado Cabello, should assume the interim presidency if a president cannot be sworn in.


== Political ideology ==

Chavez propagated what he called "socialism for the 21st century", but according to the pro-Chavez academic Gregory Wilpert, "Chavez has not clearly defined twenty-first century socialism, other than to say that it is about establishing liberty, equality, social justice, and solidarity. He has also indicated that it is distinctly different from state socialism", as implemented by the governments of the Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China. As a part of his socialist ideas, he emphasised the role of so-called "participatory democracy", which he claimed increased democratic participation, and was implemented through the foundation of the Venezuelan Communal Councils and Bolivarian Circles which he cited as examples of grassroots and participatory democracy.


=== Bolivarianism ===

Hugo Chavez defined his political position as Bolivarianism, an ideology he developed from that of Simon Bolivar (1783-1830) and others. Bolivar was a 19th-century general who led the fight against the colonialist Spanish authorities and who is widely revered across Latin America today. Along with Bolivar, the other two primary influences upon Bolivarianism are Simon Rodriguez (1769-1854), a philosopher who was Bolivar's tutor and mentor, and Ezequiel Zamora, (1817-1860), the Venezuelan Federalist general. Political analyst and Chavez supporter Gregory Wilpert, in his study of Chavez's politics, noted that "The key ingredients for Chavez's revolutionary Bolivarianism can be summarized as: an emphasis on the importance of education, the creation of civilian-military unity, Latin American integration, social justice, and national sovereignty. In many ways this is not a particularly different set of principles and ideas to those of any other Enlightenment or national liberation thinker." Chavez's ideology originating from Bolivar has also received some criticism because Chavez had occasionally described himself as being influenced by Karl Marx, a critic of Bolivar. Beddow and Thibodeaux noted the complications between Bolivar and Marx, stating that "[d]escribing Bolivar as a socialist warrior in the class struggle, when he was actually member of the aristocratic 'criollos,' is peculiar when considering Karl Marx's own writings on Bolivar, whom he dismissed as a false liberator who merely sought to preserve the power of the old Creole nobility which he belonged".


=== Marxism ===
Chavez's connection to Marxism was a complex one, though he had described himself as a Marxist on some occasions. In May 1996, he gave an interview with Agustin Blanco Munoz in which he remarked that "I am not a Marxist, but I am not anti-Marxist. I am not communist, but I am not anti-communist." In a 2009 speech to the national assembly, he said: "I am a Marxist to the same degree as the followers of the ideas of Jesus Christ and the liberator of America, Simon Bolivar." He was well versed in many Marxist texts, having read the works of many Marxist theoreticians, and often publicly quoted them. Various international Marxists supported his government, believing it to be a sign of proletariat revolution as predicted in Marxist theory. In 2010, Hugo Chavez proclaimed support for the ideas of Marxist Leon Trotsky, saying "When I called him (former Minister of Labour, Jose Ramon Rivero)" Chavez explained, "he said to me: 'President I want to tell you something before someone else tells you ... I am a Trotskyist', and I said, 'well, what is the problem? I am also a Trotskyist! I follow Trotsky's line, that of permanent revolution," and then cited Marx and Lenin.


=== Other influences ===
Chavez's early heroes were nationalist military dictators that included former Peruvian president Juan Velasco Alvarado and former Panamanian "Maximum Leader" Omar Torrijos. Chavez was also well acquainted with the various traditions of Latin American socialism, espoused by such figures as Colombian politician Jorge Eliecer Gaitan and former Chilean president Salvador Allende. Early in his presidency, Chavez was advised and influenced by the Argentine fascist Norberto Ceresole. Cuban Communist revolutionaries Che Guevara and Fidel Castro also influenced Chavez, especially with Castro's government assistance with the Bolivarian Missions. Other indirect influences on Chavez's political philosophy are the writings of American linguist Noam Chomsky and the Gospel teachings of Jesus Christ. Other inspirations of Chavez's political view are Giuseppe Garibaldi, Antonio Gramsci and Antonio Negri.


== Policy overview ==


=== Economic and social policy ===

From his election in 1998 until his death in March 2013, Chavez's administration proposed and enacted democratic socialist economic policies. Domestic policies included redistribution of wealth, land reform, and democratization of economic activity via workplace self-management and creation of worker-owned cooperatives. With increasing oil prices in the early 2000s and funds not seen in Venezuela since the 1980s, Chavez created the Bolivarian Missions, aimed at providing public services to improve economic, cultural, and social conditions. The Missions entailed the construction of thousands of free medical clinics for the poor, and the enactment of food and housing subsidies. A 2010 OAS report indicated achievements in addressing illiteracy, healthcare and poverty, and economic and social advances. with Venezuelans' quality of life improving according to a UN Index. The Gini coefficient, a measure of income inequality, also dropped from nearly .50 in 1998 to .39 in 2011, putting Venezuela behind only Canada in the Western Hemisphere. The poverty rate fell from 48.6 percent in 2002 to 29.5 percent in 2011, according to the U.N. Economic Commission for Latin America. The drop of Venezuela's poverty rate compared to poverty in other South American countries was slightly behind that of Peru, Brazil and Panama. Venezuelans aged 15 and older, 95.2% could also read and write, with Venezuela having one of the highest literacy rates in the region, though some scholars have refuted that literacy improvements during Chavez's presidency resulted from his administration's policies. Teresa A. Meade wrote that Chavez's popularity strongly depended "on the lower classes who have benefited from these health initiatives and similar policies."
The social works initiated by Chavez's government relied on oil products, the keystone of the Venezuelan economy, with Chavez's administration suffering from Dutch disease as a result. Economist Mark Weisbrot, in a 2009 analysis of the Chavez administration stated that economic expansion during Chavez's tenure "began when the government got control over the national oil company in the first quarter of 2003". Chavez gained a reputation as a price hawk in OPEC, pushing for stringent enforcement of production quotas and higher target oil prices. According to Cannon, the state income from oil revenue grew "from 51% of total income in 2000 to 56% 2006"; oil exports increased "from 77% in 1997 [...] to 89% in 2006"; and his administration's dependence on petroleum sales was "one of the chief problems facing the Chavez government". In 2012, the World Bank also explained that Venezuela's economy is "extremely vulnerable" to changes in oil prices since in 2012 "96% of the country's exports and nearly half of its fiscal revenue" relied on oil production, while by 2008, according to Foreign Policy, exports of everything but oil "collapsed". The Chavez administration then used such oil prices on his populist policies and for voters.
Economists say that the Venezuelan government's overspending on social programs and strict business policies contributed to imbalances in the country's economy, contributing to rising inflation and widening shortages near the end of Chavez's presidency. Into the 2010s, poverty began to rise in Venezuela increase and funding for healthcare in Venezuela began to decrease. According to analysts, the economic woes Venezuela suffered under President Nicolas Maduro would have still occurred with or without Chavez.
The balance between the public and private sectors of the Venezuelan economy remained relatively unchanged during Chavez's presidency, according to estimates from the Central Bank of Venezuela in 2009, with the private sector accounting for a slightly larger share than before Chavez took office, having grown faster than the government between 2003 and 2006 when the economy was healthy. According to the Venezuelan government, despite several nationalizations the government still controlled the same percent of the economy as when Chavez was elected in 1998. In January 2013 near the end of Chavez's presidency, the Heritage Foundation and the Wall Street Journal gave Venezuela's economic freedom a low score of 36.1, twenty points lower than 56.1 in 1999, ranking its freedom very low at 174 of 177 countries, with freedom on a downward trend. Nicholas Kozloff, Chavez's biographer, stated of Chavez's economic policies: "Chavez has not overturned capitalism, he has done much to challenge the more extreme, neo-liberal model of development."


==== Food and products ====

In the 1980s and 1990s health and nutrition indexes in Venezuela were generally low, and social inequality in access to nutrition was high. Chavez made it his stated goal to lower inequality in the access to basic nutrition, and to achieve food sovereignty for Venezuela. The main strategy for making food available to all economic classes was a controversial policy of fixing price ceilings for basic staple foods implemented in 2003. Between 1998 and 2006 malnutrition related deaths fell by 50%. In October 2009, the Executive Director of the National Institute of Nutrition (INN) Marilyn Di Luca reported that the average daily caloric intake of the Venezuelan people had reached 2790 calories, and that malnutrition had fallen from 21% in 1998 to 6%. Chavez also expropriated and redistributed 5 million acres of farmland from large landowners.

Price controls initiated by Chavez created shortages of goods since merchants could no longer afford to import necessary goods. Chavez blamed "speculators and hoarders" for these scarcities and strictly enforced his price control policy, denouncing anyone who sold food products for higher prices as "speculators". In 2011, food prices in Caracas were nine times higher than when the price controls were put in place and resulted in shortages of cooking oil, chicken, powdered milk, cheese, sugar and meat. The price controls increased the demand for basic foods while making it difficult for Venezuela to import goods causing increased reliance on domestic production. Economists believe this policy increased shortages. Shortages of food then occurred throughout the rest of Chavez's presidency with food shortage rates between 10% and 20% from 2010 to 2013. One possible reason for shortages is the relationship between inflation and subsidies, where no profitability due to price regulations affect operations. In turn, the lack of dollars made it difficult to purchase more food imports. Chavez's strategy in response to food shortages consisted of attempting to increase domestic production through nationalizing large parts of the food industry, though such nationalizations allegedly did the opposite and caused decreased production instead.
As part of his strategy of food security Chavez started a national chain of supermarkets, the Mercal network, which had 16,600 outlets and 85,000 employees that distributed food at highly discounted prices, and ran 6000 soup kitchens throughout the country. Simultaneously Chavez expropriated many private supermarkets. According to Commerce Minister Richard Canan, "The average [savings] for the basic food bundle (at the Mercal Bicentennial markets) is around 30%. There are some products, for example cheese and meat, which reach a savings of 50 to 60% compared with capitalist markets." The Mercal network was criticized by some commentators as being a part of Chavez's strategy to brand himself as a provider of cheap food, and the shops feature his picture prominently. The Mercal network was also subject to frequent scarcities of basic staples such as meat, milk and sugar - and when scarce products arrived, shoppers had to wait in lines.


==== Communes ====

After his election in 1998, more than 100,000 state-owned cooperatives - which claimed to represent some 1.5 million people - were formed with the assistance of government start-up credit and technical training; and the creation and maintenance, as of September 2010, of over 30,000 communal councils, examples of localised participatory democracy; which he intended to be integrated into regional umbrella organizations known as "Communes in Construction".
In 2010, Chavez supported the construction of 184 communes, housing thousands of families, with $23 million in government funding. The communes produced some of their own food, and were able to make decisions by popular assembly of what to do with government funds. In September 2010, Chavez announced the location of 876 million bolivars ($203 million) for community projects around the country, specifically communal councils and the newly formed communes. Chavez also criticised the bureaucracy still common in Venezuela saying, when in discussion with his Communes Minister Isis Ochoa, that "All of the projects must be carried out by the commune, not the bureaucracy." The Ministry for Communes, which oversees and funds all communal projects, was initiated in 2009. Despite such promises, the Venezuelan government often failed to construct the number of homes they had proposed. According to Venezuela's El Universal, one of the Chavez administration's outstanding weaknesses is the failure to meet its goals of construction of housing.


==== Currency controls ====

In the first few years of Chavez's office, his newly created social programs required large payments in order to make the desired changes. On February 5, 2003, the government created CADIVI, a currency control board charged with handling foreign exchange procedures. Its creation was to control capital flight by placing limits on individuals and only offering them so much of a foreign currency. This limit to foreign currency led to a creation of a currency black market economy since Venezuelan merchants rely on foreign goods that require payments with reliable foreign currencies. As Venezuela printed more money for their social programs, the bolivar continued to devalue for Venezuelan citizens and merchants since the government held the majority of the more reliable currencies.
The implied value or "black market value" is what Venezuelans believe the Bolivar Fuerte is worth compared to the United States dollar. The high rates in the black market make it difficult for businesses to purchase necessary goods since the government often forces these businesses to make price cuts. This leads to businesses selling their goods and making a low profit. Since businesses make low profits, this leads to shortages since they are unable to import the goods that Venezuela is reliant on.


=== Crime and punishment ===

During the 1980s and 1990s there was a steady increase in crime in Latin America. The countries of Colombia, El Salvador, Venezuela, and Brazil all had homicide rates above the regional average. During his terms as president, hundreds of thousands of Venezuelans were murdered due to violent crimes occurring in the country. Gareth A. Jones and Dennis Rodgers stated in their book Youth violence in Latin America: Gangs and Juvenile Justice in Perspective that, "With the change of political regime in 1999 and the initiation of the Bolivarian Revolution, a period of transformation and political conflict began, marked by a further increase in the number and rate of violent deaths" showing that in four years, the murder rate had increased to 44 per 100,000 people. Kidnappings also rose tremendously during Chavez's tenure, with the number of kidnappings over 20 times higher in 2011 than when Chavez was elected. Director James Brabazon, stated "kidnapping crimes had skyrocketed ... after late Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez freed thousands of violent prisoners as part of controversial criminal justice system reforms" while kidnappings and murders also increased due to Colombian organized crime activity as well. He further explained that common criminals felt that the Venezuelan government did not care for the problems of the higher and middle classes, which in turn gave them a sense of impunity that created a large business of kidnapping-for-ransom.
Under Chavez's administration, crimes were so prevalent that by 2007 the government no longer produced crime data. Homicide rates in Venezuela more than tripled, with one NGO finding the rate to have nearly quadrupled. The majority of the deaths occur in crowded slums in Caracas. The NGO found that the number of homicides in the country increased from 6,000 in 1999 to 24,763 in 2013. In 2010 Caracas had the highest murder rate in the world. According to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in 2012 there were 13,080 murders in Venezuela.
In leaked government INE data for kidnappings in the year 2009, the number of kidnappings were at an estimated 16,917, contrasting the CICPCs number of only 673, before the Venezuelan government blocked the data. According to the leaked INE report, only 1,332 investigations for kidnappings were opened or about 7% of the total kidnapping cases, with 90.4% of the kidnappings happening away from rural areas, 80% of all being express kidnappings and the most common victim being lower-middle or middle class Venezuelans and middle-aged men. Also in 2009, it was reported that Venezuelan authorities would assign judicial police to Caracas area morgues to speak with families. At that time, they would advise families not to report the murder of their family member to the media in exchange to have the process of recovering the victim's body in an expedited manner.
In September 2010, responding to escalating crime rates in the country, Chavez stated that Venezuela is no more violent than it was when he first took office. An International Crisis Group report that same year stated that when Chavez took office, there were some factors beyond his control that led to the crime epidemic throughout Venezuela, but that Chavez ignored it as well as corruption in the country; especially among fellow state officials. The report also stated that international organised crime filters between Colombia and Venezuela with the assistance among "the highest spheres of government" in Venezuela, lead to higher rates of kidnapping, drug trafficking, and homicides. Chavez supporters stated that the Bolivarian National Police has reduced crime and also said that the states with the highest murder rates were controlled by the opposition. According to the publications El Espectador and Le Monde diplomatique, rising crime in rural and urban areas of Venezuela was partly due to increased cross-border activity by Colombian right-wing paramilitary groups like Aguilas Negras.


==== Prisons ====
During Chavez's presidency, there were reports of prisoners having easy access to firearms, drugs, and alcohol. Carlos Nieto--head of Window to Freedom--alleges that heads of gangs acquire military weapons from the state, saying: "They have the types of weapons that can only be obtained by the country's armed forces. ... No one else has these." Use of internet and mobile phones are also a commonplace where criminals can take part in street crime while in prison. One prisoner explained how, "If the guards mess with us, we shoot them" and that he had "seen a man have his head cut off and people play football with it."
Edgardo Lander, a sociologist and professor at the Central University of Venezuela with a PhD in sociology from Harvard University explained that Venezuelan prisons were "practically a school for criminals" since young inmates come out "more sort of trained and hardened than when they went in". He also explained that prisons are controlled by gangs and that "very little has been done" to control them.


=== Corruption ===

In December 1998, Hugo Chavez declared three goals for the new government; "convening a constituent assembly to write a new constitution, eliminating government corruption, and fighting against social exclusion and poverty". However, during Hugo Chavez's time in power, corruption has become widespread throughout the government due to impunity towards members of the government, bribes and the lack of transparency. In 2004, Hugo Chavez and his allies took over the Supreme Court, filling it with supporters of Chavez and made new measures so the government could dismiss justices from the court. According to the libertarian Cato Institute, the National Electoral Council of Venezuela was under control of Chavez where he tried to "push a constitutional reform that would have allowed him unlimited opportunities for reelection". The Corruption Perceptions Index, produced annually by the Berlin-based NGO, Transparency International (TNI) reports findings of corruption in countries around the world. In the later years of Chavez's tenure, corruption worsened; it was 158th out of 180 countries in 2008, and 165th out of 176 (tied with Burundi, Chad, and Haiti)). Most Venezuelans believed the government's effort against corruption is ineffective, that corruption has increased, and that government institutions such as the judicial system, parliament, legislature and police are the most corrupt.
In Gallup Poll's 2006 Corruption Index, Venezuela ranked 31st out of 101 countries according to how widespread the population perceive corruption as being in the government and in business. The index lists Venezuela as the second least corrupt nation in Latin America, behind Chile. Some criticism came from Chavez's supporters. Chavez's own political party, Fifth Republic Movement (MVR), had been criticized as being riddled with the same cronyism, political patronage, and corruption that Chavez alleged were characteristic of the old "Fourth Republic" political parties. Venezuela's trade unionists and indigenous communities have participated in peaceful demonstrations intended to impel the government to facilitate labor and land reforms. These communities, while largely expressing their sympathy and support for Chavez, criticize what they see as Chavez's slow progress in protecting their interests against managers and mining concerns, respectively.


==== Aiding FARC ====
According to the International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS), "Chavez's government funded FARC's office in Caracas and gave it access to Venezuela's intelligence services" and said that during the 2002 coup attempt that, "FARC also responded to requests from (Venezuela's intelligence service) to provide training in urban terrorism involving targeted killings and the use of explosives." The IISS continued saying that "the archive offers tantalizing but ultimately unproven suggestions that FARC may have undertaken assassinations of Chavez's political opponents on behalf of the Venezuelan state." Venezuelan diplomats denounced the IISS' findings saying that they had "basic inaccuracies".
In 2007, authorities in Colombia claimed that through laptops they had seized on a raid against Raul Reyes, they found in documents that Hugo Chavez offered payments of as much as $300 million to the FARC "among other financial and political ties that date back years" along with other documents showing "high-level meetings have been held between rebels and Ecuadorean officials" and some documents claiming that FARC had "bought and sold uranium".
In 2015, Chavez's former bodyguard Leamsy Salazar stated in Bumeran Chavez that Chavez met with the high command of FARC in 2007 somewhere in rural Venezuela. Chavez created a system in which the FARC would provide the Venezuelan government with drugs that would be transported in live cattle and the FARC would receive money and weaponry from the Venezuelan government. According to Salazar, this was done in order to weaken Colombian President Alvaro Uribe, an enemy of Chavez.


=== Human rights ===


==== 1999 Venezuelan Constitution ====
In the 1999 Venezuelan constitution, 116 of the 350 articles were concerned with human rights; these included increased protections for indigenous peoples and women, and established the rights of the public to education, housing, healthcare, and food. It called for dramatic democratic reforms such as ability to recall politicians from office by popular referendum, increased requirements for government transparency, and numerous other requirements to increase localized, participatory democracy, in favor of centralized administration. It gave citizens the right to timely and impartial information, community access to media, and a right to participate in acts of civil disobedience.


==== Criticisms ====

Shortly after Hugo Chavez's election, ratings for freedom in Venezuela dropped according to political and human rights group Freedom House and Venezuela was rated "partly free". In 2004, Amnesty International criticized President Chavez's administration of not handling the 2002 coup in a proper manner, saying that violent incidents "have not been investigated effectively and have gone unpunished" and that "impunity enjoyed by the perpetrators encourages further human rights violations in a particularly volatile political climate". Amnesty International also criticized the Venezuelan National Guard and the Direccion de Inteligencia Seguridad y Prevencion (DISIP) stating that they "allegedly used excessive force to control the situation on a number of occasions" during protests involving the 2004 Venezuela recall. It was also noted that many of the protesters detained seemed to not be "brought before a judge within the legal time limit".
In 2008, Human Rights Watch released a report reviewing Chavez's human rights record over his first decade in power. The report praises Chavez's 1999 amendments to the constitution which significantly expanded human rights guarantees, as well as mentioning improvements in women's rights and indigenous rights, but noted a "wide range of government policies that have undercut the human rights protections established" by the revised constitution. In particular, the report accused Chavez and his administration of engaging in discrimination on political grounds, eroding the independence of the judiciary, and of engaging in "policies that have undercut journalists' freedom of expression, workers' freedom of association, and civil society's ability to promote human rights in Venezuela." The Venezuelan government retaliated for the report by expelling members of Human Rights Watch from the country. Subsequently, over a hundred Latin American scholars signed a joint letter with the Council on Hemispheric Affairs criticizing the Human Rights Watch report for its alleged factual inaccuracy, exaggeration, lack of context, illogical arguments, and heavy reliance on opposition newspapers as sources, amongst other things.
The International Labor Organization of the United Nations had also expressed concern over voters being pressured to join the party.

In 2010, Amnesty International criticized the Chavez administration for targeting critics following several politically motivated arrests. Freedom House listed Venezuela as being "partly free" in its 2011 Freedom in the World annual report, noting a recent decline in civil liberties. A 2010 Organization of American States report found concerns with freedom of expression, human rights abuses, authoritarianism, press freedom, threats to democracy, as well as erosion of separation of powers, the economic infrastructure and ability of the president to appoint judges to federal courts. OAS observers were denied access to Venezuela; Chavez rejected the OAS report, pointing out that its authors did not even come to Venezuela. He said Venezuela should boycott the OAS, which he felt is dominated by the United States; a spokesperson said, "We don't recognize the commission as an impartial institution". He disclaimed any power to influence the judiciary. A Venezuelan official said the report distorted and took statistics out of context, and said that "human rights violations in Venezuela have decreased". Venezuela said it would not accept an IACHR/OAS visit as long as Santiago Canton remains its Executive Secretary, unless the IACHR apologizes for what he described as its support of the 2002 coup.
In November 2014, Venezuela appeared before the United Nations Committee Against Torture over cases between 2002 and 2014. Human rights expert of the UN committee, Felice D. Gaer, noted that in "only 12 public officials have been convicted of human rights violations in the last decade when in the same period have been more than 5,000 complaints". The United Nations stated that there were 31,096 complaints of human rights violations received between the years 2011 and 2014. Of the 31,096 complaints, only 3.1% of the cases resulted in only in an indictment by the Venezuelan Public Ministry.


===== Allegations of Anti-semitism =====

Chavez's opposition to Zionism and close relations with Iran led to accusations of antisemitism Such claims were made by the Venezuelan Jewish community at a World Jewish Congress Plenary Assembly in Jerusalem. Claims of antisemitism were prompted by various remarks Chavez made, including in a 2006 Christmas speech where he complained that "a minority, the descendants of the same ones that crucified Christ", now had "taken possession of all of the wealth of the world". In 2009, attacks on a synagogue in Caracas were alleged to be influenced by "vocal denunciations of Israel" by the Venezuelan state media and Hugo Chavez even though Chavez promptly condemned the attacks blaming an "oligarchy". A weeklong CICPC investigation revealed the synagogue attack to be an 'inside job', the motive apparently being robbery rather than anti-semitism.


=== Media and the press ===

Human Rights Watch criticized Chavez for engaging in "often discriminatory policies that have undercut journalists' freedom of expression." Freedom House listed Venezuela's press as being "Not Free" in its 2011 Map of Press Freedom, noting that "[t]he gradual erosion of press freedom in Venezuela continued in 2010." Reporters Without Borders criticized the Chavez administration for "steadily silencing its critics". In the group's 2009 Press Freedom Index, Reporters Without Borders noted that "Venezuela is now among the region's worst press freedom offenders."
In July 2005 Chavez inaugurated TeleSUR, a Pan-American equivalent of Al Jazeera that sought to challenge the present domination of Latin American television news by Univision and the United States-based CNN en Espanol. In 2006 Chavez inaugurated a state-funded movie studio called Villa del Cine (English: Cinema City).
Chavez also had a Twitter account with more than 3,200,000 followers as of August 2012. A team of 200 people sorted through suggestions and comments sent via Twitter. Chavez said Twitter was "another mechanism for contact with the public, to evaluate many things and to help many people", and that he saw Twitter as "a weapon that also needs to be used by the revolution".


=== Foreign policy ===

Chavez refocused Venezuelan foreign policy on Latin American economic and social integration by enacting bilateral trade and reciprocal aid agreements, including his so-called "oil diplomacy". Relationships with Cuba (Cuba-Venezuela relations) and Iran (Iran-Venezuela relations) were of particular importance. Chavez focused on a variety of multinational institutions to promote his vision of Latin American integration, including Petrocaribe, Petrosur, and TeleSUR. Bilateral trade relationships with other Latin American countries also played a major role in his policy, with Chavez increasing arms purchases from Brazil, forming oil-for-expertise trade arrangements with Cuba, and creating unique barter arrangements that exchange Venezuelan petroleum for cash-strapped Argentina's meat and dairy products. He also befriended pariah states such as Belarus and Iran.


== In popular culture ==

Syndicated cartoonists from around the world created cartoons, illustrations, and videos of Hugo Chavez's controversial political career and the reactions to his death.
Hugo Chavez appears as a heroic character in the Latin American postmodern fantasy novel United States of Banana (2011) by Giannina Braschi; Chavez leads left-wing Latin American leaders Evo Morales, Lula, Fidel Castro, and Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner on a quest to liberate the people of Puerto Rico from the United States.
Oliver Stone directed the 2009 documentary South of the Border, where he "sets out on a road trip across five countries to explore the social and political movements as well as the mainstream media's misperception of South America, while interviewing seven of its elected presidents."
On January 15, 2014, Mexican novelist Norma Gomez released Swan Song, a political thriller that points to American involvement in the death of Hugo Chavez.
On 5 March 2014, Oliver Stone and teleSUR release the documentary film Mi Amigo Hugo (My Friend Hugo), a documentary about his political life, one year after his death. The film also is a "spiritual answer" and a tribute from Stone to Chavez.


== Personal life ==
Chavez married twice. He first wed Nancy Colmenares, a woman from a poor family in Chavez's hometown of Sabaneta. Chavez and Colmenares remained married for 18 years, during which time they had three children: Rosa Virginia, Maria Gabriela, and Hugo Rafael, the latter of whom suffers from behavioural problems. The couple separated soon after Chavez's 1992 coup attempt. During his first marriage, Chavez had an affair with historian Herma Marksman; their relationship lasted nine years. Chavez's second wife was journalist Marisabel Rodriguez de Chavez, with whom he separated in 2002 and divorced in 2004. Through that marriage, Chavez had another daughter, Rosines. Both Maria and Rosa provided Chavez with grandchildren. Allegations were made that Chavez was a womanizer, and had been throughout both his marriages, but these have remained unproven and are contradicted by statements provided by other figures close to him.
Chavez was a Catholic. He intended at one time to become a priest. He saw his socialist policies as having roots in the teachings of Jesus Christ, (liberation theology) and he publicly used the slogan of "Christ is with the Revolution!" Although he traditionally kept his own faith a private matter, Chavez over the course of his presidency became increasingly open to discussing his religious views, stating that he interpreted Jesus as a Communist. He was, in general, a liberal Catholic, some of whose declarations were disturbing to the religious community of his country. In 2008 he expressed his skepticism of an afterlife, saying that such idea was false. He also would declare his belief in Darwin's theory of evolution, stating that "it is a lie that God created man from the ground." Among other things, he cursed the state of Israel, and he had some disputes with both the Venezuelan Catholic clergy and Protestant groups like the New Tribes Mission, whose evangelical leader he "condemned to hell". In addition, he showed syncretistic practices such as the worship of the Venezuelan goddess Maria Lionza. In his last years, after he discovered he had cancer, Chavez became more attached to the Catholic Church.


== Illness ==

In June 2011, Chavez revealed in a televised address from Havana, Cuba, that he was recovering from an operation to remove an abscessed tumor with cancerous cells. Vice President Elias Jaua declared that the President remained in "full exercise" of power and that there was no need to transfer power due to his absence from the country. On 3 July, the Venezuelan government denied, however, that Chavez's tumour had been completely removed, further stating that he was heading for "complete recovery". On 17 July 2011, television news reported that Chavez had returned to Cuba for further cancer treatments.
Chavez gave a public appearance on 28 July 2011, his 57th birthday, in which he stated that his health troubles had led him to radically reorient his life towards a "more diverse, more reflective and multi-faceted" outlook, and he went on to call on the middle classes and the private sector to get more involved in his Bolivarian Revolution, something he saw as "vital" to its success. Soon after this speech, in August Chavez announced that his government would nationalize Venezuela's gold industry, taking it over from Russian-controlled company Rusoro, while at the same time also moving the country's gold stocks, which were largely stored in western banks, to banks in Venezuela's political allies like Russia, China and Brazil.
On 9 July 2012, Chavez declared himself fully recovered from cancer just three months before the 2012 Venezuelan presidential election, which he won, securing a fourth term as president. In November 2012, Chavez announced plans to travel to Cuba for more medical treatment for cancer.
On 8 December 2012, Chavez announced he would undergo a new operation after doctors in Cuba detected malignant cells; the operation took place on 11 December 2012. Chavez suffered a respiratory infection after undergoing the surgery but it was controlled. It was announced 20 December by the country's vice-president that Chavez had suffered complications following his surgery. It was announced on 3 January 2013 that Chavez had a severe lung infection that had caused respiratory failures following a strict treatment regimen for respiratory insufficiency. However he was reported to have overcome this later that month, and it was reported that he was then undergoing further treatment. On 18 February 2013, Chavez returned to Venezuela after 2 months of cancer treatment in Cuba. On 1 March 2013, Vice President Nicolas Maduro said that Chavez had been receiving chemotherapy in Venezuela following his surgery in Cuba. On 4 March, it was announced by the Venezuelan government that Chavez's breathing problems had worsened and he was suffering a new, severe respiratory infection.


== Death ==

On 5 March 2013, Vice President Nicolas Maduro announced on state television that Chavez had died in a military hospital in Caracas at 16:25 VET (20:55 UTC). The Vice President said Chavez died "after battling a tough illness for nearly two years." According to the head of Venezuela's presidential guard, Chavez died from a massive heart attack, and his cancer was very advanced when he died. Gen. Jose Ornella said that near the end of his life Chavez could not speak aloud, but mouthed his last words: "Yo no quiero morir, por favor no me dejen morir" (I don't want to die. Please don't let me die). Chavez is survived by four children and four grandchildren.
Suggestions of foul play (that Chavez had been poisoned or infected with cancer,) were strongly denied by the U.S. Department of State as "absurd".
His death triggered a constitutional requirement that a presidential election be called within 30 days. Chavez's Vice President, Maduro, was elected president on April 14, 2013.


== Honours and awards ==


=== Recognition ===
The United States-based Time magazine included Hugo Chavez among their list of the world's 100 most influential people in 2005 and 2006, noting the spreading of his anti-globalization efforts and anti-US sentiment throughout Latin America. In a 2006 list compiled by the leftist British magazine New Statesman, he was voted eleventh in the list of "Heroes of our time". In 2010 the magazine included Chavez in its annual The World's 50 Most Influential Figures. His biographers Marcano and Tyszka believed that within only a few years of his presidency, he "had already earned his place in history as the president most loved and most despised by the Venezuelan people, the president who inspired the greatest zeal and the deepest revulsion at the same time."
In 2008 Chavez was awarded the Blue Planet Award  by the Ethecon Foundation, one of the comparatively very few 'grass-root' foundations.


=== Honorary degrees ===
Chavez was awarded the following honorary degrees:
Kyung Hee University, South Korea; Honorary Doctorate in Political Science - Granted by Rector Chungwon Choue on 16 October 1999.
Universidad Autonoma de Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic; Honorary Doctorate in Jurisprudence, 9 March 2001.
University of Brasilia, Brazil; Honorary Doctorate - Granted by Rector Alberto Perez on 3 April 2001.
Universidad Nacional de Ingenieria, Nicaragua; Honorary Doctorate in Engineering - Granted by Rector Aldo Urbina on May 2001.
Diplomatic Academy of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Russia; Honorary Doctorate, 15 May 2001.
Beijing University, China; Honorary Doctorate in Economics, 24 May 2001.
Higher University of San Andres, Bolivia; Honorary Doctorate, 24 January 2006.
UARCIS, Chile; Honorary Doctorate - Granted by Rector Carlos Margotta Trincado on 7 March 2006.
University of Damascus, Syria; Honorary Doctorate - Granted by Rector Wael Moualla on 30 August 2006.
University of Tripoli, Libya; Honorary Doctorate in Economy and Human Sciences, 23 October 2010.


== See also ==

Bolivarianism
Chavismo


== References ==


=== Footnotes ===


=== Bibliography ===


==== Books ====


==== Academic articles ====


==== News articles, reports and essays ====