Kalidasa (Sanskrit: kaalidaas) was a Classical Sanskrit writer, widely regarded as the greatest poet and dramatist in the Sanskrit language. His floruit cannot be dated with precision, but most likely falls within the 5th century AD.
His plays and poetry are primarily based on the Hindu Puranas.


== Early life ==
Scholars have speculated that Kalidasa may have lived either near the Himalayas, or in the vicinity of Ujjain, or in Kalinga. The three speculations are based respectively on Kalidasa's detailed description of the Himalayas in his Kumarasambhava, the display of his love for Ujjain in Meghaduta, and his highly eulogistic descriptions of Kalingan emperor Hemangada in Raghuvamsa (sixth sarga).
But it is generally accepted that he is a Kashmiri since the pioneering research done by Lakshmi Dhar Kalla (1891-1953) in his continuously re-edited book The birth-place of Kalidasa, with notes, references and appendices (1926), saying that, far from being contradictory, these facts just show that he was born in Kashmir (based on topographic descriptions, rural folklore, the region's fauna and flora, ... only local populations could know) but moved for diverse reasons souther and sought the patronage of local rulers to prosper.
It is believed that he was from humble origin, married to princess and challenged by his wife, studied poetry to become great poet. Some believe that he visited Kumaradasa, the king of Ceylon and, because of some treachery, Kalidasa was murdered there. His wife's name was Vidyotama.


=== Period ===
His period was linked to the reign of Vikramaditya, 1st-century BCE emperor of Ujjain, and alternatively to Chandragupta II (380 CE - 415 CE) and Skandagupta (455 CE - 480 CE), were titled Vikramaditya and Kalidasa's living period is linked to their reign. It was also argued that Kalidasa lived in first century B.C. during the period of another Vikramaditya of Ujjain, but now it is generally accepted that Kalidasa's period falls between 5th and 6th Century C.E. His name, along with poet Bharavi's name, is mentioned in a stone inscription dated 634 C.E. found at Aihole, located in present day Karnataka. Earliest paleographical evidence of Kalidasa is found in a sanskrit inscription dated c.473 C.E.,found at Madasor's Sun temple. Predominant view reflects that Kalidasa was a court poet of King Chandragupta II (c. 380-413 C.E.) who had a title Vikramaditya and he shifted his capital to Ujjain.


== Works ==


=== Plays ===
Kalidasa wrote three plays. Among them, Abhijnanasakuntalam ("Of Shakuntala recognised by a token") is generally regarded as a masterpiece. It was among the first Sanskrit works to be translated into English, and has since been translated into many languages.

Malavikagnimitram ("Malavika and Agnimitra") tells the story of King Agnimitra, who falls in love with the picture of an exiled servant girl named Malavika. When the queen discovers her husband's passion for this girl, she becomes infuriated and has Malavika imprisoned, but as fate would have it, Malavika is in fact a true-born princess, thus legitimizing the affair.
Abhijnanasakuntalam ("Of Shakuntala recognised by a token") tells the story of King Dushyanta who, while on a hunting trip, meets Shakuntala, the adopted daughter of a sage, and marries her. A mishap befalls them when he is summoned back to court: Shakuntala, pregnant with their child, inadvertently offends a visiting sage and incurs a curse, by which Dushyanta will forget her completely until he sees the ring he has left with her. On her trip to Dushyanta's court in an advanced state of pregnancy, she loses the ring, and has to come away unrecognized. The ring is found by a fisherman who recognizes the royal seal and returns it to Dushyanta, who regains his memory of Shakuntala and sets out to find her. Goethe was fascinated by Kalidasa's Abhijnanasakuntalam, which became known in Europe, after being translated from English to German.
Vikramorvasiyam ("Pertaining to Vikrama and Urvashi") tells the story of mortal King Pururavas and celestial nymph Urvashi who fall in love. As an immortal, she has to return to the heavens, where an unfortunate accident causes her to be sent back to the earth as a mortal with the curse that she will die (and thus return to heaven) the moment her lover lays his eyes on the child which she will bear him. After a series of mishaps, including Urvashi's temporary transformation into a vine, the curse is lifted, and the lovers are allowed to remain together on the earth.


=== Poems ===


==== Epics ====
Kalidasa is the author of two epic poems, Raghuvamsa ("Dynasty of Raghu") and Kumarasambhava (Birth of 'Kumara' or Subrahmanya).
Raghuvamsa is an epic poem about the kings of the Raghu dynasty.
Kumarasambhava describes the birth and adolescence of the goddess Parvati, and her marriage to Lord Shiva.


==== Minor poems ====
Kalidasa also wrote two khandakavyas (minor poems):
Rtusamhara describes the six seasons by narrating the experiences of two lovers in each of the seasons.
Meghaduta or Meghasandesa is the story of a Yaksha trying to send a message to his lover through a cloud. Kalidasa set this poem to the 'mandakranta' meter known for its lyrical sweetness. It is one of Kalidasa's most popular poems and numerous commentaries on the work have been written.


=== Translations ===
Montgomery Schuyler, Jr. published a bibliography of the editions and translations of the drama Shakuntala while preparing his work "Bibliography of the Sanskrit Drama". Schuyler later completed his bibliography series of the dramatic works of Kalidasa by compiling bibliographies of the editions and translations of Vikramorvaci and Malavikagnimitra. Sir William Jones published English translation of Sakuntala in 1791 C.E. and Rtusamhara was published by him in original text during 1792 C.E.


== Later culture ==
Many scholars have written commentaries on the works of Kalidasa. Among the most studied commentaries are those by Kolachala Mallinatha Suri, which were written in the 15th century during the reign of the Vijayanagar king, Deva Raya II. The earliest surviving commentaries appear to be those of the 10th-century Kashmirian scholar Vallabhadeva. Eminent Sanskrit poets like Banabhatta, Jayadeva and Rajasekhara have lavished praise on Kalidasa in their tributes. A well-known Sanskrit verse ("Upama Kalidasasya...") praises his skill at upama, or similes. Anandavardhana, a highly revered critic, considered Kalidasa to be one of the greatest Sanskrit poets ever. Of the hundreds of pre-modern Sanskrit commentaries on Kalidasa's works, only a fraction have been contemporarily published. Such commentaries show signs of Kalidasa's poetry being changed from its original state through centuries of manual copying, and possibly through competing oral traditions which ran alongside the written tradition.
Kalidasa's Abhijnanasakuntalam was one of the first works of Indian literature to become known in Europe. It was first translated to English and then from English to German, where it was received with wonder and fascination by a group of eminent poets, which included Herder and Goethe.

"Here the poet seems to be in the height of his talent in representation of the natural order, of the finest mode of life, of the purest moral endeavor, of the most worthy sovereign, and of the most sober divine meditation; still he remains in such a manner the lord and master of his creation."

Kalidasa's work continued to evoke inspiration among the artistic circles of Europe during the late 19th century and early 20th century, as evidenced by Camille Claudel's sculpture Shakuntala.
Koodiyattam artist and Natya Shastra scholar Mani Madhava Chakyar (1899-1990) choreographed and performed popular Kalidasa plays including Abhijnanasakuntala, Vikramorvasiya and Malavikagnimitra.
The Kannada films Mahakavi Kalidasa (1955), featuring Honnappa Bagavatar, B. Sarojadevi and later Kaviratna Kalidasa (1983), featuring Rajkumar and Jayaprada, were based on the life of Kalidasa. V. Shantaram made the Hindi movie Stree (1961) based on Kalidasa's Shakuntala. R.R. Chandran made the Tamil movie Mahakavi Kalidas (1966) based on Kalidasa's life. Chevalier Nadigar Thilagam Sivaji Ganesan played the part of the poet himself. Mahakavi Kalidasu (Telugu, 1960) featuring Akkineni Nageswara Rao was similarly based on Kalidasa's life and work.
Surendra Verma's Hindi play Athavan Sarga, published in 1976, is based on the legend that Kalidasa could not complete his epic Kumarasambhava because he was cursed by the goddess Parvati, for obscene descriptions of her conjugal life with Lord Shiva in the eighth canto. The play depicts Kalidasa as a court poet of Chandragupta who faces a trial on the insistence of a priest and some other moralists of his time.
Asti Kashchid Vagarthiyam is a five-act Sanskrit play written by Krishna Kumar in 1984. The story is a variation of the popular legend that Kalidasa was mentally challenged at one time and that his wife was responsible for his transformation. Kalidasa, a mentally challenged shepard, is married to Vidyottama, a learned princess, through a conspiracy. On discovering that she has been tricked, Vidyottama banishes Kalidasa, asking him to acquire scholarship and fame if he desires to continue their relationship. She further stipulates that on his return he will have to answer the question, Asti Kashchid Vagarthah" ("Is there anything special in expression?"), to her satisfaction. In due course, Kalidasa attains knowledge and fame as a poet. Kalidasa begins Kumarsambhava, Raghuvamsa and Meghaduta with the words Asti ("there is"), Kashchit ("something") and Vagarthah ("speech").
Bishnupada Bhattacharya's "Kalidas o Robindronath" is a comparative study of Kalidasa and the Bengali poet Rabindranath Tagore.
Ashadh Ka Ek Din is a play based on fictionalized elements of Kalidasa life.


== Influences ==
Kalidasa has influenced on several sanskrit works of later years and his influence on entire Indian literature is also great. Kalidasa influenced Rabindranath Tagore a lot.The Meghadutam's romanticism is found in Rabindranath's poems on monsoon.


== Further reading ==
Miller, Barbara Stoler, ed. Theater of Memory: The Plays of Kalidasa. NY: Columbia University Press, 1984.
K. D. Sethna. Problems of Ancient India, p. 79-120 (chapter: "The Time of Kalidasa"), 2000 New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan. ISBN 81-7742-026-7 (about the dating of Kalidasa)
V. Venkatachalam. Fresh light on Kalidasa's historical perspective, Kalidasa Special Number (X), The Vikram, 1967, pp. 130-140.


== See also ==
Sanskrit literature
Sanskrit drama


== References ==


== Notes ==


== Bibliography ==