In the mathematical field of graph theory, the Laplacian matrix, sometimes called admittance matrix, Kirchhoff matrix or discrete Laplacian, is a matrix representation of a graph. Together with Kirchhoff's theorem, it can be used to calculate the number of spanning trees for a given graph. The Laplacian matrix can be used to find many other properties of the graph. Cheeger's inequality from Riemannian geometry has a discrete analogue involving the Laplacian matrix; this is perhaps the most important theorem in spectral graph theory and one of the most useful facts in algorithmic applications. It approximates the sparsest cut of a graph through the second eigenvalue of its Laplacian.


== Definition ==
Given a simple graph G with n vertices, its Laplacian matrix  is defined as:

where D is the degree matrix and A is the adjacency matrix of the graph. In the case of directed graphs, either the indegree or outdegree might be used, depending on the application.
The elements of  are given by

where deg(vi) is degree of the vertex i.
The symmetric normalized Laplacian matrix is defined as:
,
The elements of  are given by

The random-walk normalized Laplacian matrix is defined as:

The elements of  are given by


== Example ==
Here is a simple example of a labeled graph and its Laplacian matrix.


== Properties ==
For an (undirected) graph G and its Laplacian matrix L with eigenvalues :
L is symmetric.
L is positive-semidefinite (that is  for all i). This is verified in the incidence matrix section (below). This can also be seen from the fact that the Laplacian is symmetric and diagonally dominant.
L is an M-matrix (its off-diagonal entries are nonpositive, yet the real parts of its eigenvalues are nonnegative).
Every row sum and column sum of L is zero. Indeed, in the sum, the degree of the vertex is summed with a "-1" for each neighbor.
In consequence, , because the vector  satisfies 
The number of times 0 appears as an eigenvalue in the Laplacian is the number of connected components in the graph.
The smallest non-zero eigenvalue of L is called the spectral gap.
The second smallest eigenvalue of L is the algebraic connectivity (or Fiedler value) of G.
The Laplacian is an operator on the n-dimensional vector space of functions f : V - , where V is the vertex set of G, and n = |V|.
When G is k-regular, the normalized Laplacian is: , where A is the adjacency matrix and I is an identity matrix.
For a graph with multiple connected components, L is a block diagonal matrix, where each block is the respective Laplacian matrix for each component, possibly after reordering the vertices (i.e. L is permutation-similar to a block diagonal matrix).
Laplacian matrix is singular.


== Incidence matrix ==
Define an  x  oriented incidence matrix M with element Mev for edge e (connecting vertex i and j, with i > j) and vertex v given by

Then the Laplacian matrix L satisfies

where  is the matrix transpose of M.
Now consider an eigendecomposition of , with unit-norm eigenvectors  and corresponding eigenvalues :

Because  can be written as the inner product of the vector  with itself, this shows that  and so the eigenvalues of  are all non-negative.


== Deformed Laplacian ==
The deformed Laplacian is commonly defined as

where I is the unit matrix, A is the adjacency matrix, and D is the degree matrix, and s is a (complex-valued) number. Note that the standard Laplacian is just .


== Symmetric normalized Laplacian ==
The (symmetric) normalized Laplacian is defined as

where L is the (unnormalized) Laplacian, A is the adjacency matrix and D is the degree matrix. Since the degree matrix D is diagonal and positive, its reciprocal square root  is just the diagonal matrix whose diagonal entries are the reciprocals of the positive square roots of the diagonal entries of D. The symmetric normalized Laplacian is a symmetric matrix.
One has: , where S is the matrix whose rows are indexed by the vertices and whose columns are indexed by the edges of G such that each column corresponding to an edge e = {u, v} has an entry  in the row corresponding to u, an entry  in the row corresponding to v, and has 0 entries elsewhere. (Note:  denotes the transpose of S).
All eigenvalues of the normalized Laplacian are real and non-negative. We can see this as follows. Since  is symmetric, its eigenvalues are real. They are also non-negative: consider an eigenvector g of  with eigenvalue l and suppose  . (We can consider g and f as real functions on the vertices v.) Then:

where we use the inner product , a sum over all vertices v, and  denotes the sum over all unordered pairs of adjacent vertices {u,v}. The quantity  is called the Dirichlet sum of f, whereas the expression  is called the Rayleigh quotient of g.
Let 1 be the function which assumes the value 1 on each vertex. Then  is an eigenfunction of  with eigenvalue 0.
In fact, the eigenvalues of the normalized symmetric Laplacian satisfy 0 = m0<=...<= mn-1<= 2. These eigenvalues (known as the spectrum of the normalized Laplacian) relate well to other graph invariants for general graphs.


== Random walk normalized Laplacian ==
The random walk normalized Laplacian is defined as

where A is the Adjacency matrix and D is the degree matrix. Since the degree matrix D is diagonal, its inverse  is simply defined as a diagonal matrix, having diagonal entries which are the reciprocals of the corresponding positive diagonal entries of D. For the isolated vertices (those with degree 0), a common choice is to set the corresponding element  to 0. This convention results in a nice property that the multiplicity of the eigenvalue 0 is equal to the number of connected components in the graph. The matrix elements of  are given by

The name of the random-walk normalized Laplacian comes from the fact that this matrix is simply the transition matrix of a random walker on the graph. For example let  denote the i-th standard basis vector, then  is a probability vector representing the distribution of a random-walker's locations after taking a single step from vertex . i.e. . More generally if the vector  is a probability distribution of the location of a random-walker on the vertices of the graph then  is the probability distribution of the walker after  steps.
One can check that
,
i.e.,  is similar to the normalized Laplacian . For this reason, even if  is in general not hermitian, it has real eigenvalues. Indeed, its eigenvalues agree with those of  (which is hermitian) up to a reflection about 1/2.
In some of the literature, the matrix  is also referred to as the random-walk Laplacian since its properties approximate those of the standard discrete Laplacian from numerical analysis.


=== Graphs ===
As an aside about random walks on graphs, consider a simple undirected graph. Consider the probability that the walker is at the vertex i at time t, given the probability distribution that he was at vertex j at time t-1 (assuming a uniform chance of taking a step along any of the edges attached to a given vertex):

or in matrix-vector notation:

(Equilibrium, which sets in as , is defined by .)
We can rewrite this relation as

 is a symmetric matrix called the reduced adjacency matrix. So, taking steps on this random walk requires taking powers of , which is a simple operation because  is symmetric.


== Interpretation as the discrete Laplace operator ==
The Laplacian matrix can be interpreted as a matrix representation of a particular case of the discrete Laplace operator. Such an interpretation allows one, e.g., to generalise the Laplacian matrix to the case of graphs with an infinite number of vertices and edges, leading to a Laplacian matrix of an infinite size.
To expand upon this, we can "describe" the change of some element  (with some constant k) as

In matrix-vector notation,

which gives

Notice that this equation takes the same form as the heat equation, where the matrix L is replacing the Laplacian operator ; hence, the "graph Laplacian".
To find a solution to this differential equation, apply standard techniques for solving a first-order matrix differential equation. That is, write  as a linear combination of eigenvectors  of L (so that ), with time-dependent 
Plugging into the original expression (note that we will use the fact that because L is a symmetric matrix, its unit-norm eigenvectors  are orthogonal):

whose solution is

As shown before, the eigenvalues  of L are non-negative, showing that the solution to the diffusion equation approaches an equilibrium, because it only exponentially decays or remains constant. This also shows that given  and the initial condition , the solution at any time t can be found.
To find  for each  in terms of the overall initial condition , simply project  onto the unit-norm eigenvectors ;
.
In the case of undirected graphs, this works because  is symmetric, and by the spectral theorem, its eigenvectors are all orthogonal. So the projection onto the eigenvectors of  is simply an orthogonal coordinate transformation of the initial condition to a set of coordinates which decay exponentially and independently of each other.


=== Equilibrium Behavior ===
To understand , note that the only terms  that remain are those where , since

In other words, the equilibrium state of the system is determined completely by the kernel of . Since by definition, , the vector  of all ones is in the kernel. Note also that if there are  disjoint connected components in the graph, then this vector of all ones can be split into the sum of  independent  eigenvectors of ones and zeros, where each connected component corresponds to an eigenvector with ones at the elements in the connected component and zeros elsewhere.
The consequence of this is that for a given initial condition  for a graph with  vertices

where

For each element  of , i.e. for each vertex  in the graph, it can be rewritten as
.
In other words, at steady state, the value of  converges to the same value at each of the vertices of the graph, which is the average of the initial values at all of the vertices. Since this is the solution to the heat diffusion equation, this makes perfect sense intuitively. We expect that neighboring elements in the graph will exchange energy until that energy is spread out evenly throughout all of the elements that are connected to each other.


=== Example of the Operator on a Grid ===

This section shows an example of a function  diffusing over time through a graph. The graph in this example is constructed on a 2D discrete grid, with points on the grid connected to their eight neighbors. Three initial points are specified to have a positive value, while the rest of the values in the grid are zero. Over time, the exponential decay acts to distribute the values at these points evenly throughout the entire grid.
The complete Matlab source code that was used to generate this animation is provided below. It shows the process of specifying initial conditions, projecting these initial conditions onto the eigenvalues of the Laplacian Matrix, and simulating the exponential decay of these projected initial conditions.


== Approximation to the negative continuous Laplacian ==
The graph Laplacian matrix can be further viewed as a matrix form of an approximation to the (positive semi-definite) Laplacian operator obtained by the finite difference method. In this interpretation, every graph vertex is treated as a grid point; the local connectivity of the vertex determines the finite difference approximation stencil at this grid point, the grid size is always one for every edge, and there are no constraints on any grid points, which corresponds to the case of the homogeneous Neumann boundary condition, i.e., free boundary.


== In Directed Multigraphs ==
An analogue of the Laplacian matrix can be defined for directed multigraphs. In this case the Laplacian matrix L is defined as

where D is a diagonal matrix with Di,i equal to the outdegree of vertex i and A is a matix with Ai,j equal to the number of edges from i to j (including loops).


== See also ==
Stiffness matrix
Resistance distance


== References ==

T. Sunada, Discrete geometric analysis, Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics, (ed. by P. Exner, J. P. Keating, P. Kuchment, T. Sunada, A. Teplyaev), 77 (2008), 51-86.
B. Bollobaas, Modern Graph Theory, Springer-Verlag (1998, corrected ed. 2013), ISBN 0-387-98488-7, Chapters II.3 (Vector Spaces and Matrices Associated with Graphs), VIII.2 (The Adjacency Matrix and the Laplacian), IX.2 (Electrical Networks and Random Walks).