This is a list of horses and ponies in fictional subjects, excluding hybrid fantasy creatures such as centaurs and unicorns and excluding their cousin donkeys and zebras and cross-breed Mules and Zebroids.


== Horses in literature ==
Pildarlick, one of Panhandle Smith's first horses in Zane Grey's short story, Valley of Wild Horses
Abelard, Halt's trained small horse/pony in the Ranger's Apprentice series by John Flanagan
Acorn, Davy's horse in the Chaos Walking Trilogy by Patrick Ness.
Alfonso (or, in Swedish, Lilla Gubben), the horse in the Pippi Longstocking series by Astrid Lindgren.
Angharrad, Todd's horse in the Chaos Walking Trilogy by Patrick Ness.
Arondel, Bevis's horse in the Middle English romance Bevis of Hampton
Artax, Atreyu's horse in Michael Ende's The Neverending Story
Athansor, ridden by Peter Lake in Mark Helprin's A Winter's Tale
Azarax, from The Byerley Turk by Jeremy James
Azul, The Blue Horse, from The Alchemical Horseman, by Jeremy James
Banner, from My Friend Flicka
Barnum and Skip, the Wilders' driving team of Laura Ingalls Wilder's Little House books and The First Four Years
Bela, originally owned by Tam al'Thor, and later by Egwene al'Vere in The Wheel of Time series.
Bess and Beauty, two work horses from "Farmer Boy" by Laura Ingalls Wilder
Binky, ridden by Death in Terry Pratchett's Discworld novels
Black Beauty, from Black Beauty by Anna Sewell
The Black (Stallion), from a series of 21 books by Walter Farley beginning with The Black Stallion (1941)
Black Boy and Rapide, Jill Crewe's ponies from the series by Ruby Ferguson (in later editions, "Black Boy" became "Best Boy")
Blackjack, from the Percy Jackson Series
Blaze, from a series of children's books by Clarence William Anderson, beginning with Billy and Blaze (1936)
Bless, Goldmund's childhood horse in Narcissus and Goldmund by Hermann Hesse.
Boxer, Mollie, and Clover, from Animal Farm by George Orwell
Bree Hee Hinny Brinny Hoohy Hah ("Bree" for short), from The Horse and His Boy by C. S. Lewis
Bright Country, Prince Eadric's Horse from "The Tales of the frog Princess series by E.D. Baker
Bronze, the Steel General's horse in Roger Zelazny's Creatures of Light and Darkness
Cadoc, from Christopher Paolini's Eragon.
Capilet, from William Shakespeare's Twelfth Night Act 3, Scene 4 - Sir Andrew's Ague Cheek's horse
Castor, one of the team of Shire horses owned by farmer Dawson in The Dark Is Rising Sequence by Susan Cooper
Cigarette, from My Friend Flicka
Cloud, the pony owned by Veralidaine Sarrasri, plus other ponies, in The Immortals Quartet by Tamora Pierce.
Sir Chess, the Knight Destrier, in Linda Medley's Castle Waiting.
Many 'Companions', which are human spirits reincarnated in the form of white horses in Mercedes Lackey's Valdemar series of books
Condor, the mount of Green Rider Karigan G'ladheon in Kristen Britain's Green Rider series of books
Dagobaz, Ash's horse from The Far Pavilions by M. M. Kaye
De Lu, the mount of Chinese warlord Liu Bei in the Romance of the Three Kingdoms
Faran, Sparhawk's horse in David Eddings' series The Elenium and The Tamuli
Ferd, Carli's telepatic horse in Bertil Martensson's "This is Reality" (Swedish original: Detta ar verkligheten)
Figure, Justin Morgan's stallion and foundation sire of the Morgan horse breed, Justin Morgan Had a Horse by Marguerite Henry.
Flame, from The Black Stallion series
Flicka, from My Friend Flicka by Mary O'Hara
Florian, from Felix Salten's novel "Florian, the Emperor's Horse"
Fru-Fru, from Anna Karenina by Leo Tolstoy
Fury, from the original story of Norman Krasna, 1936, and made into a movie of the same year.
Gabilan, from John Steinbeck's novel The Red Pony
Glory, from Gene Markey's short story and made into a movie, 1956
Glue-Boy, Cuthbert Allgood's horse from the Dark Tower series by Stephen King.
Ginger, from Black Beauty by Anna Sewell
Gunpowder, Ichabod Crane's horse from The Legend of Sleepy Hollow by Washington Irving
The Golden Ass, 2nd century AD Roman novel in Latin
The "great horses" owned by Angus Morton in The Chrysalids. Though they are the result of an officially sanctioned breeding program, the fact they are, technically, mutants causes tension between Angus and his brother-in-law, Joseph Strorm.
Greatheart, Beauty's horse from Robin McKinley's novel Beauty
Gypsy, From Gypsy from Nowhere by Sharon Wagner
Hatatitla, Old Shatterhand's horse in Karl May's Winnetou.
Hero, the fastest horse in the world; owned by the legendary The Phantom
Highboy, from My Friend Flicka
the Houyhnhnms, a race of intelligent and cultured horses in Gulliver's Travels by Jonathan Swift
Hwin, from The Horse and His Boy by C. S. Lewis
Captain Jinks' horse, of the Horse Marines, fed on corn and beans in the nursery rhyme
Iltschi, Winnetou's horse
Jim, cab-horse from Dorothy and the Wizard in Oz by L. Frank Baum
Jolly Jumper, Lucky Luke's horse and friend in Lucky Luke
Joey, from War Horse by Michael Morpurgo
Kate and Bill, the Wilders' work horses of Laura Ingalls Wilder's The First Four Years
Kholstomer by Leo Tolstoy
Kieran's Horse, Nigel, from Kieran and the Horse by Thomas Pynchon
Lark, from The Berserker's Horse by Lisa Maxwell
Lightfoot, Meara of Rohan and the sire of Snowmane in J.R.R. Tolkien's series
Merrylegs, from Black Beauty by Anna Sewell
Miramis with the golden mane and hooves of gold from Astrid Lindgren's book Mio, My Son
Misty of Chincoteague, a real pony made famous by Marguerite Henry's children's book of the same name
Monarch, from the book Jodie's Journey
Moonlight, the horse owned by Alanna of Trebond in the Song of the Lioness quartet by Tamora Pierce
Nahar, noble steed of the Vala Orome, in J. R. R. Tolkien's The Silmarillion
Morgenstern, Julian's horse from the Chronicles of Amber Roger Zelazny
Napoleon, from the book The Black Stallion
Nana, the racehorse named for the eponymous heroine of Zola's novel Nana, and fictional winner of the Grand Prix de Paris
Nara, a Hunnuli or magical horse, from The Dark Horse series by Mary H. Herbert
Oberon, The "ghost pony" Sarah Elgin finds the remains of in an old stone house, In Lynn Hall's The Mystery of Pony Hallow
Prairie Horses from The Horseclans
Peachblossom, the horse owned by Keladry in the Protector of the Small quartet by Tamora Pierce
Persephone from House of Night by PC Cast and Kristen Cast
The Phantom, Misty's dam, Misty of Chincoteagueby Marguerite Henry.
The Pie, from National Velvet by Enid Bagnold
Pied Piper, sire of Misty, Misty of Chincoteague by Marguerite Henry.
Pilgrim from The Horse Whisperer (book) by Nicholas Evans and the The Horse Whisperer (film) based on it
Prince and Lady, Almanzo Wilder's Morgan horse driving team of Laura Ingalls Wilder's Little House books
Pollux, one of the team of Shire horses owned by farmer Dawson in The Dark Is Rising Sequence by Susan Cooper
Pylon, Susan's horse from the Dark Tower series by Stephen King.
Rakhsh, Rostam's horse in Shahnameh
Rih, Kara Ben Nemsi's horse in Karl May's tales of the orient.
Rival, wild stallion hero of Saddle a Thunderbolt by Jo Sykes.
Roach is the name Geralt of Rivia, from The Witcher series by Polish writer Andrzej Sapkowski, gives to all his horses.
Rocket, Flicka's dam, from My Friend Flicka
Rocinante, from Don Quixote by Miguel de Cervantes; also the name of fictional horses in several other books and movies
Red Hare, the mount of Lu Bu and Guan Yu in the Chinese epic Romance of the Three Kingdoms
Rusher, Roland's horse from the Dark Tower series by Stephen King.
Sam and David, the Ingalls family work horses of Laura Ingalls Wilder's Little House on the Prairie
Scipio, from the "Heroes of Olympus" series
Shadowfax, King of the Horses, from J. R. R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings
Sham from King of the Wind by Marguerite Henry
Silver from The Lone Ranger
Silver Blaze, from the Sherlock Holmes stories by Arthur Conan Doyle
Smiler, Theon Greyjoy's warhorse from A Song of Ice and Fire by George R. R. Martin
Smoky, from 'Smoky the Cow Horse' written & illustrated by Will James.
Snowfire, from Christopher Paolini's Eragon.
Stardust and Sunstorm from Ashleigh's Hope by Joanna Campbell
Starlight from "Farmer Boy" by Laura Ingalls Wilder
Stranger, Sandor Clegane's warhorse from A Song of Ice and Fire by George R. R. Martin
Stayer and Stepper, Perrin's horses in The Wheel of Time series
Stormy, from Stormy, Misty's Foal by Marguerite Henry
Sunchaser from The Unicorns Of Balinor by Mary Stanton
Sunfire, from Ravenheart and Sorrowheart by Kendra Ann Thomas
Talat, Aerin's horse in The Hero and the Crown by Robin McKinley
Tencendur, Charlemagne's warhorse in The Song of Roland
Throwra, A creamy-silver stallion, the main character in 'Silver Brumby
Thunderhead, son of Flicka from the book by Mary O'Hara
Tornac, from Christopher Paolini's Eragon.
Trojan Horse (a structure), from Virgil's Aeneid; Homer's The Odyssey; Franco Brusati's Ulysses; Hugh Gray's The Treatment of Helen of Troy; Margaret George's Helen of Troy; and Adele Geres' Troy
Trotsky, Mrs. Piggle-Wiggle's horse
Tsornin (Sungold), Harry Crewe's horse in The Blue Sword by Robin McKinley.
Topthorn from War Horse by Michael Morpurgo.
Tug, Will's trained small horse/pony in the Ranger's Apprentice series by John Flanagan
Veillantif (also called Brigliadoro), Roland's horse in the chansons de geste.
Watch Eyes, pony of Paul & Maureen Beebe, characters in Misty of Chincoteague by Marguerite Henry.
Wings, sire of Stormy, Misty's foal Stormy, Misty's Foal by Marguerite Henry.
Whinney and her offspring, Racer and Grey, from the Earth's Children books
Whirlwind from Shadow Horse by Alison Hart
Sunka Wakan " The Great Spirit horse" from The Great Spirit Horse by Linda Little Wolf
Pips, Matrim Cauthon's horse in Robert Jordan's Wheel of Time.


=== Horses in Lord of the Rings ===

Arod, Legolas's horse
Asfaloth, Glorfindel's horse
Bill the Pony, owned by the Hobbits
Brego, a horse ridden by Aragorn in The Lord of the Rings film trilogy
Bumpkin, Merry Brandybuck's horse
Fatty Lumpkin, horse owned by Tom Bombadil
Firefoot, horse owned by Eomer
Felarof, steed of Eorl the Young called the father of horses with wings upon the feet.
Hasufel, Horse given to Aragorn by the Riders of Rohan
Roheryn, horse owned by Aragorn
Shadowfax, the Horse ridden by Gandalf the White, of the race of the Mearas, Lord of all horses
Sharp-ears, one of Merry's ponies
Snowmane, King Theoden of Rohan's horse
Stybba, gift from King Theoden to Merry
Swish-tail, one of Merry's ponies
Windfola, horse ridden by Eowyn and Merry to the Battle of the Pelennor Fields during the War of the Ring
Wise-nose, one of Merry's ponies


== Horses in mythology ==
Arion, an immortal, extremely swift horse
Arvak and Alsvid pulled Sol's chariot
Balius and Xanthos, Achilles' horses
Dora, a war horse of Durad Senkovic
Dyaus Pita, the Sky Father, who appears as a horse
Embarr, Niamh's horse
Epona, Gaulish horse goddess
Glaer, a horse listed in both the Grimnismal and Gylfaginning
Grey of Macha, or Macha's Grey, CuChulainn's chariot horse; known as the king of all horses
Gringolet, Sir Gawain's horse
Gulltoppr, the horse of Heimdallr in Norse myths
Hengroen, King Arthur's horse
Hippocampus, a mythical seahorse that pulled Poseidon's chariot
Hrimfaxi, Nott's horse in Norse myths
Hofvarpnir, horse of the goddess Gna in Norse myths
Jabucilo, horse of Momcilo
Kelpie, a mythical Celtic water horse
Liath Macha and Dub Sainglend, Cuchulainn's horses
Llamrei, King Arthur's mare
Pegasus Greek mythology flying Horse
The Mares of Diomedes, which fed on human flesh
The Nuckelavee, an Orcadian horse with no skin which sometimes appears to have a man astride its body.
Rhaebus, the horse of Mezentius in Roman myths
Sarac, horse of Prince Marko
Silili, a Babylonian king of horses
Skinfaxi, Dagur's horse in Norse myths
Sleipnir, Odin's eight-legged horse in Norse myths
Svadilfari, the giant stallion that fathered Sleipnir
Tikbalang, the demon horse in Philippine folklore
Tulpar, the winged or swift horse in Turkic mythology
The Trojan Horse
Uchchaihshravas, Indra's horse in Hindu mythology
Widow-Maker/Lightning, mythical cowboy Pecos Bill's horse
Zelenko, horse of Damjan Jugovic
Zdralin, horse of Milos Obilic


== Horses in film ==

Aldebaran, Antares, Rigel and Altair from Ben-Hur (one of four from the Chariot Race)
April Love, from "April Love" (1957 film from 20th Century-Fox Film Corporation)
Artax, Atreyu's Horse from The NeverEnding Story
Bad Horse, from Dr. Horrible's Sing-Along Blog
Beau, from True Grit with John Wayne
Big John, from For Richer or Poorer
The Black Stallion, from The Black Stallion and The Black Stallion Returns, based on Walter Farley's books. Played by the Arabian stallion, Cass Ole.
Blue Boy, race horse from Laurel and Hardy's 1929 comedy short, Wrong Again
Bucephalus, from The Adventures of Baron Munchausenand Alexander (2004 film)
Buck, the buckskin horse of Ben Cartwright on the TV series "Bonanza"
Buttermilk, Dale Evans' horse
Champion, Gene Autry's horse
Chub, Chubb, or Chubby, the horse of Hoss Cartwright on the "Bonanza" television series
Cisco, John Dunbar's buckskin gelding from Dances with Wolves
Clover, Bob Wills' horse
Cochise, Little Joe's horse on the "Bonanza" television series
Cochise, the Appaloosa stallion ridden by John Wayne in the movie El Dorado
Concorde, the mount of Sir Lancelot in Monty Python and the Holy Grail (not a real horse, but a page banging coconuts together), though on the Monty Python TV show, Dennis Moore had a "real" horse named Concorde. Patsy is King Arthur's horse (page).
Conquistador, the General's horse stolen and rescued by Pablito from The Littlest Outlaw
Checkers, from Moondance Alexander
Copper, one of the horses ridden by Eddie Dean in his films
Denny, the buckskin gelding of The Man From Snowy River (also appeared in the sequel, The Man from Snowy River II)
Diablo the black and white pinto from the Cisco Kid movies
Don, talking horse from Hot to Trot
Dover, race horse from My Fair Lady (does not appear on screen)
Flicka, from Flicka (based on the book "My Friend Flicka")
Flash, from Flash
Flash, one of the horses ridden by Eddie Dean in his films
Francis, from "Francis the Talking Horse"
Frou-Frou, from The Aristocats
Fury, from "Fury"
Ginger, from Black Beauty
Goliath, from Ladyhawke
Gulliver, from The Horse Whisperer (book) and The Horse Whisperer (film)
Gunpowder, Constable Ichabod Crane's horse in the film The Legend of Sleepy Hollow
Gypsy, Meggie MacWade's horse, which undertakes an incredible 500-mile journey over treacherous terrain to be reunited with her from Gypsy Colt
Hidalgo, paint stallion from the movie of the same name (disputed)
The Horse of a Different Color, from The Wizard of Oz
Joey, from the movie "War Horse"
Little Blackie, from the John Wayne film True Grit
Lucky Number Slevin, from the movie of the same name
Khartoum, the ill-fated horse from The Godfather
Maximus, horse featured in the animated film, "Tangled".
Majesty, a white horse from Barbie and her Sisters in A Pony Tale
Napoleon, Snoe's gray cart horse and The Black's stable mate in the film The Black Stallion
Nurah,Thebes, the horses of Pharao Ramses from Cecil B. DeMill's 1956 The Ten Commandments.
Oliver Hardy, at the end of Flying Deuces; after he died in a plane crash, he was reincarnated as a horse.
Pie, Velvet Brown's horse from National Velvet
Phillip, Edmund's horse from The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe (voiced by Philip Steuer)
Pilgrim, troubled, injured horse from The Horse Whisperer (book) and The Horse Whisperer (film)
Pepper (1995) From Two Bits and Pepper.
Rigel, from Ben-Hur
Taff/Bo - Main Horse character in Disney's Ride a Wild Pony
Shadowfax (2001) Lord of the Rings: the Fellowship of the Ring
Some horse characters from Racing Stripes
Sonny, Joe's horse in My Outlaw Brother (1951 film starring Mickey Rooney)
Spirit, buckskin stallion from Spirit: Stallion of the Cimarron
Sport, the chestnut gelding of Adam Cartwright on the television series, "Bonanza"
Sprout, from The Parent Trap (1998 film)
Tolo, gelding from The Long Shot
Tony, Tom Mix's horse
Trigger, Roy Rogers' horse
Tir na nOg from Into the West (film)
Trojan Horse, from Helen of Troy, Warner Bros. Pictures (1956 film)
Two Bits (1995) From Two bits and Pepper.
Victor, the Lone Ranger's nephew's horse
War Paint, one of the horses ridden by Eddie Dean in his films
White Cloud, one of the horses ridden by Eddie Dean in his films


== Horses in television ==
Argo, from Xena: Warrior Princess
Bandit, buckskin from Caitlin's Way
The Black Stallion in Adventures of the Black Stallion
Champion the Wonder Horse, the eponymous hero of a 1950s television series
Buck, the buckskin horse ridden by Trampas in the TV series The Virginian
Chestnut, from the TV Series 2 Broke Girls
Chico, also his real name, Queen of Sword's horse.
Domino, the pinto ridden by Bill Longley, played by Rory Calhoun in The Texan TV series
Mr. Ed, eponymous horse of the CBS series from 1961-1966
Fury, the eponymous black stallion of the 1950s TV series
Hercules, Steptoe and Son's horse
Joe D., the horse ridden by the Virginian in the TV series The Virginian
Katy, the paint mare belonging to The Kid from The Young Riders
Pie-O-My, Ralph Cifaretto's horse from Episodes 44 and 48 of Season 4 of The Sopranos
Pokey, the horse from The Gumby Show
Polka-Dotted Horse, Ludicrous Lion's horse from H.R. Pufnstuf
Phantom, Zorro's white horse in the Disney series Zorro
Scout, Tonto's horse
Silver, the Lone Ranger's horse
Sophie, Colonel Potter's horse on M*A*S*H
Spartan, Amy Fleming's horse from Heartland
Superstar, the real name of the black horse who played James West's horse in the TV series The Wild Wild West
Saddle Club horses from The Saddle Club
Tornado, Zorro's black horse
Wildfire, from ABC Family's Wmildfire (TV series)


== Horses in animation ==
Achilles, horse of Captain Phoebus in Disney's The Hunchback of Notre Dame
Angus, horse of Merida in Disney's Brave
Altivo, Cortez's warhorse from Dreamwork's The Road to El Dorado
Bucephalus, demon-horse of Alexander the Great from Reign: The Conqueror
Buck, the sheriff's horse from Home on the Range (2004 film)
Bullseye, Woody's horse in Toy Story 2 and Toy Story 3
Captain, the authoritative farm horse in Disney's 101 Dalmatians
Chet, from The Littlest Pet Shop
Cyril Proudbottom, Toad's helpful but clumsy, goofy horse friend in Disney's The Adventures of Ichabod and Mr. Toad
De Royal, Double Eight, Chestnut, Mikagehomare, Miyako, Rosanna from Silver Spoon
Dosankos, a pegasus in Little Pollon
Frou-Frou, from Aristocats
Fun Saiki, from Mobile Fighter G Gundam
Gallopin' Gals
Horace Horsecollar from the Walt Disney cartoons
"Horse", Dudley Do-Right's horse
Jean Kirschtein, a horse faced creature from Shingeki no Kyojin
Khan, the Fa family's horse from Disney's Mulan
Lightning, from Dinozaurs: The Series
Maximus, the horse who pursued Flynn Rider in Disney's Tangled
Mr. Horse from Ren and Stimpy
My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic
Noble Heart Horse, a Care Bears Cousin from the Care Bears television series and films
Opal, in Ribon no Kishi
Pharfignewton, Pinky's girlfriend on Animaniacs and Pinky and the Brain
Phillipe, Belle and her father's horse from Disney's Beauty and the Beast
Pony Puff Princess, Dee Dee's idol in Dexter's Laboratory
Ponycorn Bomberman B-Daman Bakugaiden
Princess, Lisa's horse in The Simpsons
Quick Draw McGraw, of Hanna-Barbera's cartoon series
Rain, the paint mare from Spirit: Stallion of the Cimarron
Samson, Prince Phillip's horse from Disney's Sleeping Beauty
Sabure, in Tari Tari
Spirit from She-Ra
Spirit, the stallion from Spirit: Stallion of the Cimarron
Starlight and Skydancer, from Rainbow Brite
Sugarfoot, a Walter Lantz cartoon
Tempest, Princess Sissi's horse from show of the same name
Thowra, the Silver Brumby in The Silver Brumby cartoon series
Yato, from Legend of Basara


== Horses in comics ==
Alsan, from Red River
Basashi, from K - Days of Blue and K - Memory of Red
Comet, Supergirl's pet horse.
Lucy, pet horse and special friend to Danae in Wiley Miller's Non Sequitur
Rin Sohma in form of the horse from Fruits Basket.
Nightmare, from Casper the Friendly Ghost.
Spark Plug, Barney Google, By Billy DeBeck
Blue Horse and Brown Horse, two programmers from the web comic horse++


== Horses in song ==
Becky, the horse from Carl Perkins' "Movie Magg"
Bottle of Smoke, the eponymous horse in the song by The Pogues
Chestnut Mare, the eponymous horse in the song by The Byrds
Feitlebaum, the racehorse who always comes up from behind to finish first (even in a car race) in songs by Doodles Weaver (performed with Spike Jones and his City Slickers)
Henry the Horse, the waltzing horse from The Beatles' "Being for the Benefit of Mr. Kite" (based on a real horse called Zanthus, from Pablo Fanque's Circus Royal)
Paul Revere, the horse from the song of the same name by the Beastie Boys
The Horse with No Name, the horse in the eponymous song by America
Mac, from Mason Proffit's "Two Hangmen"
Pinto the wonder horse from the song by Tom T. Hall
Stewball, from the eponymous song by Peter, Paul and Mary
The Old Gray Mare, the horse in the eponymous song
The Tennessee Stud, the horse in the eponymous song written by Jimmy Driftwood
Trigger, the horse who pulled the fastest milkcart in the West in Benny Hill's "Ernie (The Fastest Milkman in the West)"
Wildfire, the horse in the eponymous song by Michael Martin Murphey
"Galway Bay", the 'coal-black mare with a white starred chest' in the song "The Galway Farmer" by Steve Knightly of Show of Hands.
Sorrow, the name of the carnie's horse in the Nick Cave & The Bad Seeds song "The Carnie"
Molly O'Brian and Tenbrooks, who raced in the song "The Ballad of Molly and Tenbrooks" written by Bill Monroe
The Strawberry Roan, an unrideable horse in the eponymous song performed by Marty Robbins, Chris LeDoux, and others
Badger, a possibly unrideable horse in the song "The Scene We All Ain't Saw" by Chris LeDoux
The Brute, a horse ridden for the first time in the song "The Continental Suit"
The Yellow Stud, an unrideable horse in the eponymous song performed by Chris LeDoux
Lisette, crazed horse in the song "Run Lisette" by Glass Hammer


== Horses in video games ==
Agro, the horse of Wander, and Phaedra, the 4th Colossus in Shadow of the Colossus
Hudson Horstachio, Viva Pinata
Epona is Link's horse in The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time, The Legend of Zelda: Majora's Mask and The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess.
Matsukaze, from the video game series Samurai Warriors
Old Gary, the rotten old horse from Peasant's Quest
Smith, Iolo's horse in Ultima series, who talks and can give clues for the previous part in the series.
Red Hare, from the video game series Dynasty Warriors
Ruin, horse of War in Darksiders
Despair, horse of Death in Darksiders II
Primrose, Hector's horse in Dragon Warrior IV, who pulls the party's wagon.
Geryon, demon horse in Devil May Cry 3
Shadowmere, a black horse with red eyes in The Elder Scrolls IV: Oblivion and V: Skyrim obtained after joining the Dark Brotherhood
Frost,a breeding stallion in V: Skyrim obtained after completing the quest Promises to Keep
Arvak, a skeletal horse with blue flames in The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim obtained after completing the Soul Cairn Horse Quest
Butt Stallion in Borderlands 2. A pure diamond horse owned by Handsome Jack
Ixion, one of Yuna's summons from Final Fantasy X
"The Boss's Horse", an Andalusian horse who appears in Metal Gear Solid 3: Snake Eater, in Metal Gear Solid 4: Guns of the Patriots (as a painting, though this is non-canon), and in Metal Gear Solid: Peace Walker as the temporary steed of Big Boss.


== Horses in toys ==
Several Beanie Babies
Horseland
Breyer horses
My Little Pony
Grand Champions
Schleich
Papo


== See also ==
List of horses in Middle-earth
List of unicorns
List of winged horses
List of winged unicorns


== References ==