Nicolae Ceausescu (/,ni:ko:'laI tSaU'Sesku:/ NEE-kaw-LY chow-SHES-koo; Romanian: [niko'la.e tSea.u'Sesku]; 26 January 1918 - 25 December 1989) was a Romanian Communist politician. He was General Secretary of the Romanian Communist Party from 1965 to 1989, and as such was the country's second and last Communist leader. He was also the country's head of state from 1967 to 1989.
A member of the Romanian Communist youth movement, Ceausescu rose up through the ranks of Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej's Socialist government and, upon the death of Gheorghiu-Dej in 1965, he succeeded to the leadership of Romania's Communist Party as General Secretary.
After a brief period of relatively moderate rule, Ceausescu's regime became increasingly brutal and repressive. By some accounts, his rule was the most rigidly Stalinist in the Soviet bloc. He maintained controls over speech and the media that were very strict even by Soviet-bloc standards, and internal dissent was not tolerated. His secret police, the Securitate, was one of the most ubiquitous and brutal secret police forces in the world. In 1982, with the goal of paying off Romania's large foreign debt, Ceausescu ordered the export of much of the country's agricultural and industrial production. The resulting extreme shortages of food, fuel, energy, medicines, and other basic necessities drastically lowered living standards and intensified unrest. Ceausescu's regime was also marked by an extensive and ubiquitous cult of personality, nationalism, a continuing deterioration in foreign relations even with the Soviet Union, and nepotism.
Ceausescu's regime collapsed after he ordered his security forces to fire on anti-government demonstrators in the city of Timisoara on 17 December 1989. The demonstrations spread to Bucharest and became known as the Romanian Revolution, which was the only violent removal of a Communist government in the course of the revolutions of 1989. Ceausescu and his wife, Elena, fled the capital in a helicopter but were captured by the armed forces. On 25 December the couple were hastily tried and convicted by a special military tribunal on charges of genocide and sabotage of the Romanian economy in an approximate one hour long court session. Ceausescu and his wife were then shot by a firing squad.


== Early life and career ==

Ceausescu was born in the village of Scornicesti, Olt County, on 26 January 1918 being one of the ten children of a poor peasant family (see Ceausescu family). His father, Andruta Ceausescu, owned 3 hectares (7.4 acres) of agricultural land, a few sheep, and he also supplemented his large family's income through tailoring. Nicolae studied at the village school until at the age of 11, when he ran away from his abusive, alcoholic father to Bucharest. He initially lived with his sister, Niculina Rusescu, and then became an apprentice shoemaker.
He worked in the workshop of Alexandru Sandulescu, a shoemaker who was an active member in the then-illegal Communist Party. Ceausescu was soon involved in the Communist Party activities (becoming a member in early 1932), but, as a teenager, he was given only small tasks. He was first arrested in 1933, at the age of 15 for street fighting during a strike and again, in 1934, first for collecting signatures on a petition protesting the trial of railway workers and twice more for other similar activities. By the mid-1930s, he had been in missions in Bucharest, Craiova, Campulung, and Ramnicu Valcea, being arrested several times.
The profile file from the secret police, Siguranta Statului, named him "a dangerous Communist agitator" and "distributor of Communist and antifascist propaganda materials". For these charges he was convicted on 6 June 1936 by the Brasov Tribunal to 2 years in prison, an additional 6 months for contempt of court, and one year of forced residence in Scornicesti. He spent most of his sentence in Doftana Prison. While out of jail in 1940, he met Elena Petrescu, whom he married in 1946 and who would play an increasing role in his political life over the years.

Soon after being freed, he was arrested again and sentenced for "conspiracy against social order", spending the time during the war in prisons and internment camps: Jilava (1940), Caransebes (1942), Vacaresti (1943), and Targu Jiu (1943). In 1943, he was transferred to Targu Jiu internment camp where he shared a cell with Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej, becoming his protege. After World War II, when Romania was beginning to fall under Soviet influence, he served as secretary of the Union of Communist Youth (1944-1945).
After the Communists seized power in Romania in 1947, he headed the ministry of agriculture, then served as deputy minister of the armed forces under Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej, becoming a major-general. In 1952, Gheorghiu-Dej brought him onto the Central Committee months after the party's "Muscovite faction" led by Ana Pauker had been purged. In 1954, he became a full member of the Politburo and eventually rose to occupy the second-highest position in the party hierarchy.


== Leadership of Romania ==
Ceausescu was not the obvious successor to Gheorghiu-Dej when he died on 19 March 1965, despite his closeness to the longtime leader, but amid widespread infighting among older and more connected officials the Politburo turned to Ceausescu as a compromise candidate. He was elected general secretary on 22 March 1965, three days after Gheorghiu-Dej's death. One of his first acts was to change the name of the party from the Romanian Workers' Party back to the Communist Party of Romania, and declare the country a socialist republic rather than a people's republic. In 1967, he consolidated his power by becoming president of the State Council, making him de jure head of state.
Initially, Ceausescu became a popular figure in Romania and also in the West, because of his independent foreign policy, challenging the authority of the Soviet Union. In the 1960s, he eased press censorship and ended Romania's active participation in the Warsaw Pact (though Romania formally remained a member). He not only refused to take part in the 1968 invasion of Czechoslovakia by Warsaw Pact forces, but actively and openly condemned that action in his 21 August 1968 speech. He even traveled to Prague a week before the invasion to offer moral support to his Czechoslovak counterpart, Alexander Dubcek. Although the Soviet Union largely tolerated Ceausescu's recalcitrance, his seeming independence from Moscow earned Romania a maverick status within the Eastern Bloc.

During the following years Ceausescu pursued an open policy towards the United States and Western Europe. Romania was the first Warsaw Pact country to recognize West Germany, the first to join the International Monetary Fund, and the first to receive a US President, Richard Nixon. In 1971, Romania became a member of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). Romania and Yugoslavia were also the only Eastern European countries that entered into trade agreements with the European Economic Community before the fall of the Eastern Bloc.

A series of official visits to Western countries (including the US, France, the United Kingdom, and Spain) helped Ceausescu to present himself as a reforming Communist, pursuing an independent foreign policy within the Soviet Bloc. He also became eager to be seen as an enlightened international statesman, able to mediate in international conflicts, and to gain international respect for Romania. Ceausescu negotiated in international affairs, such as the opening of US relations with China in 1969 and the visit of Egyptian president Anwar Sadat to Israel in 1977. Also Romania was the only country in the world to maintain normal diplomatic relations with both Israel and the PLO. In 1980, Romania participated in the 1980 Moscow Olympics with its other Soviet bloc allies but in 1984 was one of the few Communist countries to participate in the 1984 Summer Olympics when most of the East bloc's nations boycotted this event.


=== The 1966 decree ===
In 1967, Ceausescu, in an attempt to boost the country's population, made abortion illegal, and introduced Decree 770 to reverse the very low birth rate and fertility rate. Mothers of at least five children would be entitled to significant benefits, while mothers of at least ten children were declared heroine mothers by the Romanian state. Few women ever sought this status; instead, the average Romanian family during the time had two to three children (see Demographics of Romania).
The government also targeted rising divorce rates and made divorce much more difficult--it was decreed that a marriage could be dissolved only in exceptional cases. By the late 1960s, the population began to swell. In turn, a new problem was created by child abandonment, which swelled the orphanage population (see Cighid). Transfusions of untested blood led to Romania accounting for many of Europe's pediatric HIV/AIDS cases at the turn of the 21st century despite having a population that only makes up around 3% of Europe's total population.


=== Speech of 21 August 1968 ===

Ceausescu's speech of 21 August 1968 represented the apogee of Ceausescu's regime. It marked the highest point in Ceausescu's popularity, when he openly condemned the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia.


=== July Theses ===

Ceausescu visited China, North Korea, the Mongolian People's Republic and North Vietnam in 1971. He took great interest in the idea of total national transformation as embodied in the programs of North Korea's Juche and China's Cultural Revolution. He was also inspired by the personality cults of North Korea's Kim Il-sung and China's Mao Zedong. Shortly after returning home, he began to emulate North Korea's system. North Korean books on Juche were translated into Romanian and widely distributed inside the country.
On 6 July 1971, he delivered a speech before the Executive Committee of the PCR. This quasi-Maoist speech, which came to be known as the July Theses, contained seventeen proposals. Among these were: continuous growth in the "leading role" of the Party; improvement of Party education and of mass political action; youth participation on large construction projects as part of their "patriotic work"; an intensification of political-ideological education in schools and universities, as well as in children's, youth and student organizations; and an expansion of political propaganda, orienting radio and television shows to this end, as well as publishing houses, theatres and cinemas, opera, ballet, artists' unions, promoting a "militant, revolutionary" character in artistic productions. The liberalisation of 1965 was condemned and an index of banned books and authors was re-established.
The Theses heralded the beginning of a "mini cultural revolution" in Romania, launching a Neo-Stalinist offensive against cultural autonomy, reaffirming an ideological basis for literature that, in theory, the Party had hardly abandoned. Although presented in terms of "Socialist Humanism", the Theses in fact marked a return to the strict guidelines of Socialist Realism, and attacks on non-compliant intellectuals. Strict ideological conformity in the humanities and social sciences was demanded. Competence and aesthetics were to be replaced by ideology; professionals were to be replaced by agitators; and culture was once again to become an instrument for political-ideological propaganda and hardline measures.


=== President of Romania ===

In 1974, Ceausescu converted his post of president of the State Council to a full-fledged executive presidency. He was first elected to this post in 1974, and would be reelected every five years until 1989.
Although Ceausescu had been nominal head of state since 1967, he had merely been first among equals on the State Council, with his real power coming from his status as party leader. The new post, however, made him the nation's top decision-maker both in name and in fact. He was empowered to carry out those functions of the State Council that didn't require plenums. He also appointed and dismissed the president of the Supreme Court and the prosecutor general whenever the legislature wasn't in session. In practice, from 1974 onward Ceausescu frequently ruled by decree. For all intents and purposes, Ceausescu now held all governing power in the nation; virtually all party and state institutions were subordinated to his will.
He continued to follow an independent policy in foreign relations--for example, in 1984, Romania was one of few communist states (notably including the People's Republic of China, and Yugoslavia) to take part in the American-organized 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles.

Also, the Socialist Republic of Romania was the first of the Eastern bloc nations to have official relations with the Western bloc and the European Community: an agreement including Romania in the Community's Generalised System of Preferences was signed in 1974 and an Agreement on Industrial Products was signed in 1980. On 4 April 1975, Ceausescu visited Japan and met with Emperor Hirohito.


=== Pacepa defection ===
In 1978, Ion Mihai Pacepa, a senior member of the Romanian political police (Securitate, State Security), defected to the United States. A 3-star general, he was the highest ranking defector from the Eastern Bloc during the Cold War. His defection was a powerful blow against the regime, forcing Ceausescu to overhaul the architecture of the Security. Pacepa's 1986 book, Red Horizons: Chronicles of a Communist Spy Chief (ISBN 0-89526-570-2), claims to expose details of Ceausescu's regime, such as massive spying on American industry and elaborate efforts to rally Western political support.


=== Foreign debt ===

Ceausescu's political independence from the Soviet Union and his protest against the invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 drew the interest of Western powers, whose governments briefly believed that he was an anti-Soviet maverick and hoped to create a schism in the Warsaw Pact by funding him. Ceausescu did not realise that the funding was not always favorable. Ceausescu was able to borrow heavily (more than $13 billion) from the West to finance economic development programs, but these loans ultimately devastated the country's finances. He also secured a deal for cheap oil from Iran, but that deal fell through after the Shah was overthrown.
In an attempt to correct this, Ceausescu decided to repay Romania's foreign debts. He organised a referendum and managed to change the constitution, adding a clause that barred Romania from taking foreign loans in the future. According to official results, the referendum yielded a nearly unanimous "yes" vote.
In the 1980s, Ceausescu ordered the export of much of the country's agricultural and industrial production in order to repay its debts. The resulting domestic shortages made the everyday life of Romanians a fight for survival as food rationing was introduced and heating, gas and electricity blackouts became the rule. During the 1980s, there was a steady decrease in the Romanian population's standard of living, especially in the availability and quality of food and general goods in shops. During this time, all regional radio stations were closed, and television was limited to a single channel broadcasting for only two hours a day.
The debt was fully paid in the summer of 1989, shortly before Ceausescu was overthrown. However, heavy exports continued until the revolution in December.


=== 1984 failed coup d'etat attempt ===
A tentative coup d'etat planned in October 1984 failed when the military unit assigned to carry out the plan was sent to harvest maize instead.


== Revolution ==

In November 1989, the XIVth Congress of the Romanian Communist Party (PCR) saw Ceausescu, then aged 71, re-elected for another five years as leader of the PCR. During the Congress, Ceausescu made a speech denouncing the anti-Communist revolutions happening throughout the rest of Eastern Europe. The following month, Ceausescu's regime itself collapsed after a series of violent events in Timisoara and Bucharest in December 1989.


=== Timisoara ===
Demonstrations in the city of Timisoara were triggered by the government-sponsored attempt to evict Laszlo Tokes, an ethnic Hungarian pastor, accused by the government of inciting ethnic hatred. Members of his ethnic Hungarian congregation surrounded his apartment in a show of support.
Romanian students spontaneously joined the demonstration, which soon lost nearly all connection to its initial cause and became a more general anti-government demonstration. Regular military forces, police and Security fired on demonstrators on 17 December 1989, killing and injuring men, women and children.
On 18 December 1989, Ceausescu departed for a state visit to Iran, leaving the duty of crushing the Timisoara revolt to his subordinates and his wife. Upon his return to Romania on the evening of 20 December, the situation became even more tense, and he gave a televised speech from the TV studio inside Central Committee Building (CC Building), in which he spoke about the events at Timisoara in terms of an "interference of foreign forces in Romania's internal affairs" and an "external aggression on Romania's sovereignty".
The country, which had little or no information of the Timisoara events from the national media, learned about the Timisoara revolt from western radio stations such as Voice of America and Radio Free Europe, and by word of mouth. On the next day, 21 December, Ceausescu staged a mass meeting in Bucharest. Official media presented it as a "spontaneous movement of support for Ceausescu", emulating the 1968 meeting in which Ceausescu had spoken against the invasion of Czechoslovakia by Warsaw Pact forces.


=== Overthrow ===


==== Speech on 21 December ====

The mass meeting of 21 December, held in what is now Revolution Square, began like many of Ceausescu's speeches over the years. Ceausescu spoke of the achievements of the "Socialist revolution" and Romanian "multi-laterally developed Socialist society." He also blamed the Timisoara riots on "fascist agitators who want to destroy socialism."
However, Ceausescu had misjudged the crowd's mood. Roughly eight minutes into his speech, several people began jeering, booing and whistling at him, others began chanting "Timisoara!". He tried to silence them by raising his right hand and calling for the crowd's attention before order was temporarily restored, then proceeded to announce social benefit reforms that included raising of the national minimum wage by 200 lei per month. Images of Ceausescu's facial expression as the crowd began to boo and heckle him were among the most widely broadcast of the collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe.
Failing to control the crowds, the Ceausescus finally took cover inside the building that housed the Central Committee of the Romanian Communist Party, where they remained until the next day. The rest of the day saw an open revolt of Bucharest's population, which had assembled in University Square and confronted the police and army at barricades. The rioters were no match for the military apparatus concentrated in Bucharest, which cleared the streets by midnight and arrested hundreds of people in the process.


==== Flight on 22 December ====
By the morning of 22 December, the rebellion had already spread to all major cities across the country. The suspicious death of Vasile Milea, the defense minister (later confirmed as a suicide), was announced by the media. Immediately thereafter, Ceausescu presided over the CPEx (Political Executive Committee) meeting and assumed the leadership of the army.
Believing that Milea had been murdered, rank-and-file soldiers switched sides to the revolution almost en masse. The commanders wrote off Ceausescu as a lost cause and made no effort to keep their men loyal to the regime. Ceausescu made a last desperate attempt to address the crowd gathered in front of the Central Committee building, but the people in the square began throwing stones and other projectiles at him, forcing him to take refuge in the building once more. One group of protesters forced open the doors of the building, by now left unprotected. They managed to overpower Ceausescu's bodyguards and rushed through his office and onto the balcony. Although they did not know it, they were only a few meters from Ceausescu, who was trapped in an elevator. He, Elena and four others managed to get to the roof and escaped by helicopter, only seconds ahead of a group of demonstrators who had followed them there. The PCR disappeared soon afterward; unlike its kindred parties in the former Soviet bloc, it has never been revived.
During the course of the revolution, the western press published estimates of the number of people killed by Securitate forces in attempting to support Ceausescu and quell the rebellion. The count increased rapidly until an estimated 64,000 fatalities were widely reported across front pages. The Hungarian military attache expressed doubt regarding these figures, pointing out the unfeasible logistics of killing such a large number of people in such a short period of time. After Ceausescu's death, hospitals across the country reported a death toll of fewer than 1,000, and probably much lower than that.


=== Death ===

Ceausescu and his wife Elena fled the capital with Emil Bobu and Manea Manescu and headed, by helicopter, for Ceausescu's Snagov residence, whence they fled again, this time for Targoviste. Near Targoviste they abandoned the helicopter, having been ordered to land by the army, which by that time had restricted flying in Romania's airspace. The Ceausescus were held by the police while the policemen listened to the radio. They were eventually turned over to the army.
On Christmas Day, 25 December, 1989, in a small room the Ceausescus were tried before a kangaroo court convened on orders of the National Salvation Front, Romania's provisional government. They faced charges including illegal gathering of wealth and genocide. Ceausescu repeatedly denied the court's authority to try him, and asserted he was still legally president of Romania. At the end of the quick show trial the Ceausescus were found guilty and sentenced to death. A soldier standing guard in the proceedings was ordered to take the Ceausescus out back one by one and shoot them, but the Ceausescus demanded to die together. The soldiers agreed to this and began to tie their hands behind their back which the Ceausescus protested again but were powerless to prevent.
The Ceausescus were executed by a gathering of soldiers: Captain Ionel Boeru, Sergeant-Major Georghin Octavian and Dorin-Marian Cirlan, while reportedly hundreds of others also volunteered. The firing squad began shooting as soon as the two were in position against a wall. A TV crew who were to film the execution only managed to catch the end of it as the Ceausescus lay on the ground shrouded by dust kicked up by the bullets striking the wall and ground. Before his sentence was carried out, Nicolae Ceausescu sang "The Internationale" while being led up against the wall. After the shooting, the bodies were covered with canvas.
The hasty show trial and the images of the dead Ceausescus were videotaped and the footage promptly released in numerous western countries two days after the execution. Later that day, it was also shown on Romanian television.
The manner in which the trial was conducted was widely criticised inside and outside Romania. However, Ion Iliescu, Romania's provisional president, said in 2009 that the trial was "quite shameful, but necessary" in order to end the state of near-anarchy that had gripped the country in the three days since the Ceausescus fled Bucharest. Similarly, Victor Stanculescu, who had been defense minister before going over to the revolution, said in 2009 that the alternative would have been seeing the Ceausescus lynched on the streets of Bucharest.
The Ceausescus were the last people to be executed in Romania before the abolition of capital punishment on 7 January 1990.
Nicolae and Elena Ceausescu were originally buried in simple graves at Ghencea Cemetery in Bucharest, on opposite sides of a path; their graves were often decorated with flowers and symbols of their regime. In April 2007, their son, Valentin Ceausescu, lost an appeal for an investigation into whether the graves were genuine. Upon his death in 1996, the younger son, Nicu, was buried nearby in the same cemetery. According to Jurnalul National, requests were made by the Ceausescus' daughter Zoia and by supporters of their political views to move their remains to mausoleums or to purpose-built churches. These demands were denied by the government.


==== Exhumation and reburial ====
On 21 July 2010, forensic scientists exhumed the bodies to perform DNA tests to conclusively prove that they were indeed the remains of the Ceausescus. Elena's body had decayed too much to allow for a positive identification, but Nicolae was easily identifiable, wearing the bullet-riddled black winter coat he had been wearing when he was killed, and DNA was able to conclusively prove his identity. His family organized a funeral service for the couple, and they were reburied together at Ghencea, under a modest tombstone.


== Personality cult and authoritarianism ==

Ceausescu created a pervasive personality cult, giving himself such titles as "Conducator" ("Leader") and "Geniul din Carpati" ("The Genius of the Carpathians"), with inspiration from Proletarian Culture (Proletkult). After his election as President of Romania, he even had a king-like sceptre made for himself.
The most important day of the year during Ceausescu's rule was his birthday, 26 January -- a day which saw Romanian media saturated with praise for him. According to historian Victor Sebestyen, it was one of the few days of the year when the average Romanian put on a happy face, since appearing miserable on this day was too risky to contemplate.
Such excesses prompted painter Salvador Dali to send a congratulatory telegram to the "Conducator", in which he sarcastically congratulated Ceausescu on his "introducing the presidential sceptre". The Communist Party daily Scinteia published the message, unaware that it was a work of satire. To lessen the chance of further treason after Pacepa's defection, Ceausescu also invested his wife Elena and other members of his family with important positions in the government. This led Romanians to joke that Ceausescu was creating "socialism in one family".
Not surprisingly, Ceausescu was greatly concerned about his public image. For years, nearly all official photographs of him showed him in his late 40s. Romanian state television was under strict orders to portray him in the best possible light. Additionally, producers had to take great care to make sure that Ceausescu's height (he was only 1.68 metres (5 ft 6 in) tall) was never emphasized on screen. Consequences for breaking these rules were severe; one producer showed footage of Ceausescu blinking and stuttering, and was banned for three months.


=== Statesmanship ===

Ceausescu's Romania was the only Eastern Bloc country that retained diplomatic relations with Israel and did not sever diplomatic relations after Israel's pre-emptive strike against Egypt at the start of the Six-Day War in 1967. Ceausescu made efforts to act as a mediator between the PLO and Israel. Similarly, Romania was the only Soviet bloc country to attend the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles, which had been boycotted by the Soviets and their allies in response to the U.S.-led boycott of the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow.
He organised a successful referendum for reducing the size of the Romanian Army by 5% and held large rallies for peace.
He was a close ally and personal friend of dictator President Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire. Relations were in fact not just state-to-state, but party-to-party between the MPR and the Romanian Communist Party. Many believe that Ceausescu's death played a role in influencing Mobutu to "democratise" Zaire in 1990.
France granted Ceausescu the Legion of Honour and in 1978 he became a Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath (GCB, stripped in 1989) in the UK. Elena Ceausescu was arranged to be "elected" to membership of a Science Academy in the USA; all of these, and more, were arranged by the Ceausescus as a propaganda ploy through the consular cultural attaches of Romanian embassies in the countries involved.
Ceausescu's Romania was the only Warsaw Pact country that did not sever diplomatic relations with Chile after Augusto Pinochet's coup.
In August 1976, Nicolae Ceausescu was the first high-level Romanian visitor to Bessarabia since World War II. In December 1976, at one of his meetings in Bucharest, Ivan Bodiul said that "the good relationship was initiated by Ceausescu's visit to Soviet Moldova".


== Legacy ==

Nicolae and Elena Ceausescu had three children: Valentin Ceausescu (born 1948), a nuclear physicist; Nicu Ceausescu (1951-1996), also a physicist; and a daughter, Zoia Ceausescu (1949-2006), who was a mathematician. After the death of his parents, Nicu Ceausescu ordered the construction of an Orthodox church, the walls of which are decorated with portraits of his parents.
Praising the crimes of so-called totalitarian regimes and denigrating their victims is forbidden by law in Romania; this includes the Ceausescu regime. Dinel Staicu was fined 25,000 lei (approx. 9,000 United States dollars) for praising Ceausescu and displaying his pictures on his private television channel (3TV Oltenia). Nevertheless, according to opinion polls held in 2010, 41% of Romanians would vote for Ceausescu and 63% think that their lives were better before 1989. In 2014, the percentage of those who would vote for Ceausescu reached 66%.


== "Ceausism" ==

While the term Ceausism became widely used inside Romania, usually as a pejorative, it never achieved status in academia. This can be explained by the largely crude and syncretic character of the dogma. Ceausescu attempted to include his views in mainstream Marxist theory, to which he added his belief in a "multilaterally developed Socialist society" as a necessary stage between the Leninist concepts of Socialist and Communist societies (a critical view reveals that the main reason for the interval is the disappearance of the State and Party structures in Communism). A Romanian Encyclopedic Dictionary entry in 1978 underlines the concept as "a new, superior, stage in the Socialist development of Romania [...] begun by the 1971-1975 Five-Year Plan, prolonged over several [succeeding and projected] Five-Year Plans".
Ceausism's main trait was a form of Romanian nationalism, one which arguably propelled Ceausescu to power in 1965, and probably accounted for the Party leadership gathered around Ion Gheorghe Maurer choosing him over the more orthodox Gheorghe Apostol. Although he had previously been a careful supporter of the official lines, Ceausescu came to embody Romanian society's wish for independence after what many considered years of Soviet directives and purges, during and after the SovRom fiasco. He carried this nationalist option inside the Party, manipulating it against the nominated successor Apostol. This nationalist policy had more timid precedents: for example, the Gheorghiu-Dej regime had overseen the withdrawal of the Red Army in 1958.
It had also engineered the publishing of several works that subverted the Russian and Soviet image, such as the final volumes of the official History of Romania, no longer glossing over traditional points of tension with Russia and the Soviet Union (even alluding to an unlawful Soviet presence in Bessarabia). In the final years of Gheorghiu-Dej's rule more problems were openly discussed, with the publication of a collection of Karl Marx texts that dealt with Romanian topics, showing Marx's previously censored, politically uncomfortable views of Russia.
Ceausescu was prepared to take a more decisive step in questioning Soviet policies. In the early years of his rule, he generally relaxed political pressures inside Romanian society, which led to the late 1960s and early 1970s being the most liberal decade in Socialist Romania. Gaining the public's confidence, Ceausescu took a clear stand against the 1968 crushing of the Prague Spring by Leonid Brezhnev. After a visit from Charles de Gaulle earlier in the same year (during which the French President gave recognition to the incipient maverick), Ceausescu's public speech in August deeply impressed the population, not only through its themes, but also because, uniquely, it was unscripted. He immediately attracted Western sympathies and backing, which lasted well beyond the 'liberal' phase of his regime; at the same time, the period brought forward the threat of armed Soviet invasion: significantly, many young men inside Romania joined the Patriotic Guards created on the spur of the moment, in order to meet the perceived threat. President Richard Nixon was invited to Bucharest in 1969, which was the first visit of a United States president to a Socialist country after the start of the Cold War.
Alexander Dubcek's version of Socialism with a human face was never suited to Romanian Communist goals. Ceausescu found himself briefly aligned with Dubcek's Czechoslovakia and Josip Broz Tito's Yugoslavia. The latter friendship was to last until Tito's death in 1980, with Ceausescu adapting the Titoist doctrine of "independent Socialist development" to suit his own objectives. Romania proclaimed itself a "Socialist" (in place of "People's") Republic to show that it was fulfilling Marxist goals without Moscow's overseeing.
The system's nationalist traits grew and progressively blended with Juche and Maoist ideals. In 1971, the Party, which had already been completely purged of internal opposition (with the possible exception of Gheorghe Gaston Marin), approved the July Theses, expressing Ceausescu's disdain of Western models as a whole, and the reevaluation of the recent liberalisation as bourgeois. The 1974 11th Congress tightened the Party's grip on Romanian culture, guiding it towards Ceausescu's nationalist principles:. Notably, it demanded that Romanian historians refer to Dacians as having "an unorganised State", part of a political continuum that culminated in the Socialist Republic. The regime continued its cultural dialogue with ancient forms, with Ceausescu connecting his cult of personality to figures such as Mircea cel Batran (whom he styled Mircea the Great) and Mihai Viteazul. It also started adding Dacian or Roman versions to the names of cities and towns (Drobeta to Turnu Severin, Napoca to Cluj). Although Ceausescu maintained an independent, "national Communist" course, his absolute control over the country led many non-Romanian observers to describe his regime as one of the closest things to an old-style Stalinist regime. The last edition of the Country Study on Romania, for instance, referred to the PCR's "Stalinist repression of individual liberties."
A new generation of committed supporters on the outside confirmed the regime's character. Ceausescu probably never emphasized that his policies constituted a paradigm for theorists of National Bolshevism such as Jean-Francois Thiriart, but there was a publicised connection between him and Iosif Constantin Dragan, an Iron Guardist Romanian-Italian emigre millionaire (Dragan was already committed to a Dacian Protochronism that largely echoed the official cultural policy).
Nicolae Ceausescu had a major influence on modern-day Romanian populist rhetoric. In his final years, he had begun to rehabilitate the image of pro-Nazi dictator Ion Antonescu. Although Antonescu's image was never a fully official myth in Ceausescu's time, today's politicians such as Corneliu Vadim Tudor have coupled the images of the two leaders into their versions of a national Pantheon. The conflict with Hungary over the treatment of the Magyar minority in Romania had several unusual aspects: not only was it a vitriolic argument between two officially Socialist states (as Hungary had not yet officially embarked on the course to a free market economy), it also marked the moment when Hungary, a state behind the Iron Curtain, appealed to the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe for sanctions to be taken against Romania. This meant that the later 1980s were marked by a pronounced anti-Hungarian discourse, which owed more to nationalist tradition than to Marxism, and the ultimate isolation of Romania on the world stage.
The strong opposition of his regime to all forms of perestroika and glasnost placed Ceausescu at odds with Mikhail Gorbachev. He was very displeased when other Warsaw Pact countries decided to try their own versions of Gorbachev's reforms. In particular, he was incensed when Poland's leaders opted for a power-sharing arrangement with the Solidarity trade union. He even went as far as to call for a Warsaw Pact invasion of Poland--a significant reversal, considering how violently he opposed the invasion of Czechoslovakia 20 years earlier. For his part, Gorbachev made no secret of his distaste for Ceausescu, whom he called "the Romanian fuhrer." At a meeting between the two, Gorbachev upbraided Ceausescu for his inflexible attitude. "You are running a dictatorship here," the Soviet leader warned.
In November 1989, at the XIVth and last congress of the PCR, Ceausescu condemned the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact and asked for the annulment of its consequences. In effect, this amounted to a demand for the return of Bessarabia (most of which was then a Soviet republic and since 1991 has been independent Moldova) and northern Bukovina, both of which had been occupied by the Soviet Union in 1940 and again at the end of World War II.


== Cultural depictions ==
He was played by Constantin Cojocaru in the 2011 Swiss docudrama, Die letzten Tage der Ceausescus.


== Honours and awards ==
Ceausescu received the Danish Order of the Elephant, but this award was revoked on 23 December 1989 by the queen of Denmark, Margrethe II.
Ceausescu was likewise stripped of his honorary GCB (Knight Grand Cross of the Most Honourable Order of the Bath) status by Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom on the day before his execution. Queen Elizabeth II also returned the Romanian order Ceausescu had bestowed upon her.
On his 70th birthday in 1988, Ceausescu was decorated with the Karl-Marx-Orden by then Socialist Unity Party of Germany (SED) chief Erich Honecker; through this he was honoured for his rejection of Mikhail Gorbachev's reforms.
Romanian decorations
All titles and decorations were revoked by the provisional government on December 26, 1989.
Hero of Romania, three times (1971, 1978 and 1988)
Hero of Socialist Labour (1964)
Order of the Victory of Socialism (accompanied each Hero of Romania)
Order of Labour
Order of Homeland Defence
Order of the Star of the Republic of Romania
Military Merit Medal
Commemorative Medal of the 5th Anniversary of the Republic of Romania
Commemorative Medal of the 35th Anniversary of the Liberation of Romania
Foreign decorations
Several foreign decorations were revoked at the time of the collapse of the Ceausescu regime.
Legion of Honour (France)
Great Star of Honour for Services to the Republic of Austria (1969)
Knight Grand Cross decorated with Grand Cordon of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic (21 May 1973)
Special class of the Grand Cross of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany, 17 May 1971)
Order of Jose Marti (Cuba, 1973)
Order of Lenin, twice (Soviet Union, 1973 and 1988; all Soviet decorations were revoked in 1990)
Collar of the Order of the Liberator General San Martin (Argentina, 1974)
Grand Collar of the Ancient Order of Sikatuna (Philippines, 1975)
Order of the Southern Cross (Brazil, 1975)
Jubilee Medal "Thirty Years of Victory in the Great Patriotic War 1941-1945" (Soviet Union, 1975)
Collar of the Order of Saint James of the Sword (Portugal, 14 October 1975)
Athens Gold Medal (1976)
Twentieth Anniversary Commemorative Medal of the Assault on the Moncada Barracks (Cuba, 1976)
Knight Grand Cross of the Most Honourable Order of the Bath (United Kingdom, 1978; expelled 24 December 1989)
Gold Medal Plate (International Relations Institute of Rome, 1979)
Knight of the Royal Order of the Seraphim (Sweden, 4 November 1980)
Knight of the Order of the Elephant (Denmark, 1980; subsequently expelled 23 December 1989)
Order of Stara Planina (Bulgaria, 1983)
Order of the October Revolution (Soviet Union, 1983)
Gold Collar of the Olympic Order (International Olympic Committee, 1984)--for decision not to participate in the boycott of the Los Angeles Olympics
Order of Karl Marx (German Democratic Republic, 1988)--for his defence of Marxism by rejecting Gorbachev's reforms
Grand Cross of the Royal Norwegian Order of St. Olaf (expelled 1989)
Commemorative Medal of the 2500th Anniversary of the founding of the Persian Empire (Empire of Iran, 14 October 1971).
Honorary degrees from the University of Bucharest (1973), Lebanese University (1974), University of Buenos Aires (1974), Autonomous University of Yucatan (1975), University of Nice Sophia Antipolis (1975), University of Liberia (1988) and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (1988).


== Selected published works ==
Report during the joint solemn session of the CC of the Romanian Communist Party, the National Council of the Socialist Unity Front and the Grand National Assembly: Marking the 60th anniversary of the creation of a Unitary Romanian National State, 1978
Major problems of our time: Eliminating underdevelopment, bridging gaps between states, building a new international economic order, 1980
The solving of the national question in Romania (Socio-political thought of Romania's President), 1980
Ceausescu: Builder of Modern Romania and International Statesman, 1983
The nation and co-habiting nationalities in the contemporary epoch (Philosophical thought of Romania's president), 1983
Istoria poporului Roman in conceptia presedintelui, 1988


== Gallery ==


== See also ==


== Notes ==


== References ==
Mic Dictionar Enciclopedic ("Small encyclopedic dictionary"), 1978
Edward Behr, Kiss the Hand you Cannot Bite, ISBN 0-679-40128-8
Dumitru Burlan, Dupa 14 ani - Sosia lui Ceausescu se destainuie ("After 14 Years: The Double of Ceausescu confesses"). Editura Ergorom. 31 July 2003 (in Romanian).
Juliana Geran Pilon, The Bloody Flag. Post-Communist Nationalism in Eastern Europe. Spotlight on Romania, ISBN 1-56000-062-7; ISBN 1-56000-620-X
Marian Oprea, "Au trecut 15 ani - Conspiratia Securitatii" ("After 15 Years: The Conspiracy of State Security"), in Lumea Magazin Nr 10, 2004: (in Romanian; link leads to table of contents, verifying that the article exists, but the article itself is not online).
Viorel Patrichi, "Eu am fost sosia lui Nicolae Ceausescu" ("I was Ceausescu's double"), Lumea Magazin Nr 12, 2001 (in Romanian)
Stevens W. Sowards, Twenty-Five Lectures on Modern Balkan History (The Balkans in the Age of Nationalism), 1996, in particular Lecture 24: The failure of Balkan Communism and the causes of the Revolutions of 1989
Victor Stanculescu, "Nu va fie mila, au 2 miliarde de lei in cont" ("Do not have mercy, they hold 2 billion lei [33 million dollars] in their account[s]"), in Jurnalul National, 22 Nov 2004
John Sweeney, The Life and Evil Times of Nicolae Ceausescu, ISBN 0-09-174672-8
Stelian Tanase, "Societatea civila romaneasca si violenta" ("Romanian Civil Society and Violence"), in Agora, issue 3/IV, July-September 1991
Filip Teodorescu, et al., Extracts from the minutes of a Romanian senate hearing, 14 December 1994, featuring the remarks of Filip Teodorescu.
Catalin Gruia, "Viata lui Nicolae Ceausescu", in National Geographic Romania, November 2007, pp. 41-65
Dennis Deletant (1995), Ceausescu and the Securitate: Coercion and Dissent in Romania, 1965-1989, ISBN 978-1563246333 pub. M. E. Sharpe. p. 351


== External links ==
Ceausescu, Nicolae - Romania under Communism
Nicolae Ceausescu's last speech in public
Ceausescu's trial transcripts (in English)
Ceausescu's trial transcripts (in Romanian)

Romania's Demographic Policy
The Politicians and the revolution of 1989 (in Romanian)
Gheorghe Bratescu, Clipa 638: Un complot ratat ("A failed scheme"). On how Milea died, probably killed by Stanculescu according to this writer, and the life of the Ceausescu family. (In Romanian)
Death of the Father: Nicolae Ceausescu Focuses on his death, but also discusses other matters. Many photos.
"Killer File" entry on Nicolae Andruta Ceausescu Chronological overview of important events in his life and rule.
Video on YouTube, Video of the trial and execution of Nicolae and Elena Ceausescu.