Pablo Neruda (/n@'ru:d@/; Spanish: ['pablo ne'ruda]) was the pen name and, later, legal name of the Chilean poet-diplomat and politician Neftali Ricardo Reyes Basoalto (July 12, 1904 - September 23, 1973). He derived his pen name from the Czech poet Jan Neruda. He won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1971.
Neruda became known as a poet when he was 10 years old. He wrote in a variety of styles, including surrealist poems, historical epics, overtly political manifestos, a prose autobiography, and erotically charged love poems such as the ones in his collection Twenty Love Poems and a Song of Despair (1942). He often wrote in green ink, which was his personal symbol for desire and hope.
The Colombian novelist Gabriel Garcia Marquez once called Neruda "the greatest poet of the 20th century in any language." Harold Bloom included Neruda as one of the 26 writers central to the "Western tradition" in his book The Western Canon.
On July 15, 1945, at Pacaembu Stadium in Sao Paulo, Brazil, Neruda read to 100,000 people in honor of the Communist revolutionary leader Luis Carlos Prestes.
During his lifetime, Neruda occupied many diplomatic positions and served a term as a Senator for the Chilean Communist Party. When President Gonzalez Videla outlawed communism in Chile in 1948, a warrant was issued for Neruda's arrest. Friends hid him for months in the basement of a house in the port city of Valparaiso. Later, Neruda escaped through a mountain pass near Maihue Lake into Argentina.
Years later, Neruda was a close advisor to Chile's socialist President Salvador Allende. When Neruda returned to Chile after his Nobel Prize acceptance speech, Allende invited him to read at the Estadio Nacional before 70,000 people.
Neruda was hospitalised with cancer at the time of the coup d'etat led by Augusto Pinochet. On 23 September 1973, Neruda died of prostate cancer in his house in Isla Negra. Pinochet, backed by elements of the armed forces, denied permission for Neruda's funeral to be made a public event. However, thousands of grieving Chileans disobeyed the curfew and crowded the streets.


== Life and careerEdit ==


=== Early yearsEdit ===
Pablo Neruda was born on July 12, 1904, in Parral, Chile, a city in Linares Province in the Maule Region, some 350 km south of Santiago, to Jose del Carmen Reyes Morales, a railway employee, and Rosa Basoalto, a school teacher who died one month after he was born. Soon after her death, Reyes moved to Temuco, where he married Trinidad Candia Marverde, a woman with whom he had had another child nine years earlier, a boy named Rodolfo. Neruda grew up in Temuco with Rodolfo and a half-sister, Laura, one of his father's children by another woman. He composed his first poems in the winter of 1914.


=== Early careerEdit ===

Neruda's father opposed his son's interest in writing and literature, but he received encouragement from others, including the future Nobel Prize winner Gabriela Mistral, who headed the local girls' school. On July 18, 1917, at the age of thirteen, he published his first work, an essay entitled "Entusiasmo y perseverancia"(Enthusiasm and Perseverance) in the local daily newspaper La Manana, signed Neftali Reyes. From 1918 to mid-1920 he published numerous poems, such as "Mis ojos" ("My eyes"), and essays in local magazines, as Neftali Reyes. In 1919, he participated in the literary contest Juegos Florales del Maule and won third place for his poem "Comunion ideal" or "Nocturno ideal." By mid-1920, when he adopted the pseudonym Pablo Neruda, he was a published author of poems, prose, and journalism. He is thought to have named himself Neruda after the Czech poet Jan Neruda. The young poet's intention in publishing under a pseudonym was to avoid his father's disapproval of his poems.
In 1921, at the age of 16, Neruda moved to Santiago to study French at the Universidad de Chile, with the intention of becoming a teacher. However, he was soon devoting all his time to writing poems. In 1923, his first volume of verse, Crepusculario (Book of Twilights), was published, followed the next year by Veinte poemas de amor y una cancion desesperada (Twenty Love Poems and a Song of Despair), a collection of love poems that was controversial for its eroticism, especially considering its author's young age. Both works were critically acclaimed and have been translated into many languages. Over the decades, Veinte poemas sold millions of copies and became Neruda's best-known work, though it did not go to a second edition until 1932. By the age of 20, Neruda had established an international reputation as a poet, but faced poverty.
In 1926, he published the collection Tentativa del hombre infinito (The Attempt of the Infinite Man) and the novel El habitante y su esperanza (The Inhabitant and His Hope). In 1927, out of financial desperation, he took an honorary consulship in Rangoon, the capital of the British Indian colony of Burma, then administered from New Delhi as a province of British India. Rangoon was a place he had never heard of before. Later, mired in isolation and loneliness, he worked in Colombo (Ceylon), Batavia (Java), and Singapore. In Java he met and married his first wife, a Dutch bank employee named Maryka Antonieta Hagenaar Vogelzang. While he was in the diplomatic service, Neruda read large amounts of verse, experimented with many different poetic forms, and wrote the first two volumes of Residencia en la Tierra, which includes many surrealistic poems.


=== Spanish Civil WarEdit ===
After returning to Chile, Neruda was given diplomatic posts in Buenos Aires and then Barcelona, Spain. He later succeeded Gabriela Mistral as consul in Madrid, where he became the center of a lively literary circle, befriending such writers as Rafael Alberti, Federico Garcia Lorca, and the Peruvian poet Cesar Vallejo. A daughter, Malva Marina Trinidad, was born in Madrid in 1934; she was to be plagued with health problems, especially hydrocephalus, during her short life. During this period, Neruda slowly became estranged from his wife and began a relationship with Delia del Carril, an Argentine twenty years his senior.
As Spain became engulfed in civil war, Neruda became intensely politicised for the first time. His experiences of the Spanish Civil War and its aftermath moved him away from privately focused work in the direction of collective obligation. Neruda became an ardent Communist for the rest of his life. The radical leftist politics of his literary friends, as well as that of del Carril, were contributing factors, but the most important catalyst was the execution of Garcia Lorca by forces loyal to the dictator Franco. By means of his speeches and writings, Neruda threw his support behind the Spanish Republic, publishing the collection Espana en el corazon (Spain in My Heart, 1938). He lost his post as consul due to his political militancy.
His marriage broke down and the couple divorced in 1936. His ex-wife moved to Monte Carlo and then to the Netherlands with their only child, and he never saw either of them again. After leaving his wife, Neruda lived with Delia del Carril in France.
After the election of President Pedro Aguirre Cerda, whom Neruda supported, in 1938, Neruda was appointed special consul for Spanish emigrants in Paris. There he was responsible for what he called "the noblest mission I have ever undertaken": transporting 2,000 Spanish refugees who had been housed by the French in squalid camps to Chile on an old ship called the Winnipeg. Neruda is sometimes charged with having selected only fellow-Communists for emigration, to the exclusion of others who had fought on the side of the Republic. Others deny these accusations, pointing out that Neruda chose only a few hundred of the refugees personally; the rest were selected by the Service for the Evacuation of Spanish Refugees set up by Juan Negrin, President of the Spanish Republican Government in Exile.


=== Mexican appointmentEdit ===
Neruda's next diplomatic post was as Consul General in Mexico City, where he spent the years 1940 to 1943. While he was there, he married del Carril, and learned that his daughter Malva had died, aged eight, in the Nazi-occupied Netherlands.
In 1940, after the failure of an assassination attempt against Leon Trotsky, Neruda arranged a Chilean visa for the Mexican painter David Alfaro Siqueiros, who was accused of having been one of the conspirators in the assassination. Neruda later said that he did it at the request of the Mexican President, Manuel Avila Camacho. This enabled Siqueiros, then jailed, to leave Mexico for Chile, where he stayed in Neruda's private residence. In exchange for Neruda's assistance, Siqueiros spent over a year painting a mural in a school in Chillan. Neruda's relationship with Siqueiros attracted criticism, but Neruda dismissed the allegation that his intent had been to help an assassin as "sensationalist politico-literary harassment".


=== Return to ChileEdit ===
In 1943, after his return to Chile, Neruda made a tour of Peru, where he visited Machu Picchu, an experience that later inspired Alturas de Macchu Picchu, a book-length poem in twelve parts that he completed in 1945, and that expressed his growing awareness of, and interest in, the ancient civilizations of the Americas. He explored this theme further in Canto General. In Alturas, Neruda celebrated the achievement of Machu Picchu, but also condemned the slavery that had made it possible. In Canto XII, he called upon the dead of many centuries to be born again and to speak through him. Martin Espada, poet and professor of creative writing at the University of Massachusetts Amherst, has hailed the work as a masterpiece, declaring that "there is no greater political poem".


=== CommunismEdit ===
Bolstered by his experiences in the Spanish Civil War, Neruda, like many left-leaning intellectuals of his generation, came to admire the Soviet Union of Joseph Stalin, partly for the role it played in defeating Nazi Germany and partly because of an idealist interpretation of Marxist doctrine. This is echoed in poems such as "Canto a Stalingrado" (1942) and "Nuevo canto de amor a Stalingrado" (1943). In 1953 Neruda was awarded the Stalin Peace Prize. Upon Stalin's death that same year, Neruda wrote an ode to him, as he also wrote poems in praise of Fulgencio Batista "Saludo a Batista", ("Salute to Batista") and later to Fidel Castro. His fervent Stalinism eventually drove a wedge between Neruda and his longtime friend Octavio Paz, who commented that "Neruda became more and more Stalinist, while I became less and less enchanted with Stalin." Their differences came to a head after the Nazi-Soviet Ribbentrop-Molotov Pact of 1939, when they almost came to blows in an argument over Stalin. Although Paz still considered Neruda "The greatest poet of his generation", in an essay on Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn he wrote that when he thinks of "Neruda and other famous Stalinist writers and poets, I feel the gooseflesh that I get from reading certain passages of the Inferno. No doubt they began in good faith [...] but insensibly, commitment by commitment, they saw themselves becoming entangled in a mesh of lies, falsehoods, deceits and perjuries, until they lost their souls."
Neruda also called Lenin the "great genius of this century," and in a speech he gave on June 5, 1946, he paid tribute to the late Soviet leader Mikhail Kalinin, who for Neruda was "man of noble life," "the great constructor of the future," and "a comrade in arms of Lenin and Stalin".
Neruda later came to rue his support of the Soviet leadership. In response to Nikita Khrushchev's Secret Speech at the Soviet 20th Party Congress in 1956, which denounced the "cult of personality" that had surrounded Stalin and accused him of committing crimes during the Great Purges, Neruda wrote in his memoirs that "I had contributed my share to the personality cult," explaining that "in those days, Stalin seemed to us the conqueror who had crushed Hitler's armies." Of a subsequent visit to China in 1957, Neruda wrote: "What has estranged me from the Chinese revolutionary process has not been Mao Tse-tung but Mao Tse-tungism." He dubbed this Mao Tse-Stalinism: "the repetition of a cult of a Socialist deity." Despite his disillusionment with Stalin, Neruda never lost his essential faith in Communist theory and remained loyal to "the Party." Anxious not to give ammunition to his ideological enemies, he would later refuse publicly to condemn the Soviet repression of dissident writers like Boris Pasternak and Joseph Brodsky, an attitude with which even some of his staunchest admirers disagreed.
On March 4, 1945, Neruda was elected a Communist Senator for the northern provinces of Antofagasta and Tarapaca in the Atacama Desert. He officially joined the Communist Party of Chile four months later.
In 1946, the Radical Party's presidential candidate, Gabriel Gonzalez Videla, asked Neruda to act as his campaign manager. Gonzalez Videla was supported by a coalition of left-wing parties and Neruda fervently campaigned on his behalf. Once in office, however, Gonzalez Videla turned against the Communist Party and issued the Law of Permanent Defense of the Democracy. The breaking point for Senator Neruda was the violent repression of a Communist-led miners' strike in Lota in October 1947, when striking workers were herded into island military prisons and a concentration camp in the town of Pisagua. Neruda's criticism of Gonzalez Videla culminated in a dramatic speech in the Chilean senate on January 6, 1948, which became known as "Yo acuso" ("I accuse"), in the course of which he read out the names of the miners and their families who were imprisoned at the concentration camp.
During the late 1960s, Argentine writer Jorge Luis Borges was asked for his opinion of Pablo Neruda. Borges stated, "I think of him as a very fine poet, a very fine poet. I don't admire him as a man, I think of him as a very mean man." He said that Neruda had not spoken out against Peron because he was afraid to risk his reputation, noting "I was an Argentine poet, he was a Chilean poet, he's on the side of the Communists, I'm against them. So I felt he was behaving very wisely in avoiding a meeting that would have been quite uncomfortable for both of us."


=== ExileEdit ===

A few weeks later in 1948, finding himself threatened with arrest, Neruda went into hiding and he and his wife were smuggled from house to house hidden by supporters and admirers for the next thirteen months. While in hiding, Senator Neruda was removed from office and in September 1948 the Communist Party was banned altogether under the Ley de Defensa Permanente de la Democracia (Law for the Permanent Defense of Democracy), called by critics the Ley Maldita (Accursed Law), which eliminated over 26,000 people from the electoral registers, thus stripping them of their right to vote. Neruda moved later to Valdivia in southern Chile. From Valdivia he moved to Fundo Huishue a forestry estate in the vicinity of Huishue Lake. Neruda's life underground ended in March 1949 when he fled over the Lilpela Pass on the Andes Mountains to Argentina on horseback. He would dramatically recount his escape from Chile in his Nobel Prize lecture.
Once out of Chile, he spent the next three years in exile. In Buenos Aires, Neruda took advantage of the slight resemblance between him and his friend, the future Nobel Prize-winning novelist and cultural attache to the Guatemalan embassy, Miguel Angel Asturias, to travel to Europe using Asturias's passport. Pablo Picasso arranged his entrance into Paris and Neruda made a surprise appearance there to a stunned World Congress of Peace Forces, while the Chilean government denied that the poet could have escaped the country. Neruda spent those three years traveling extensively throughout Europe as well as taking trips to India, China, Sri Lanka and the Soviet Union. His trip to Mexico in late 1949 was lengthened due to a serious bout of phlebitis. A Chilean singer named Matilde Urrutia was hired to care for him and they began an affair that would, years later, culminate in marriage. During his exile, Urrutia would travel from country to country shadowing him and they would arrange meetings whenever they could. Matilde Urrutia was the muse for Los versos del capitan, which he later published anonymously in 1952.

While in Mexico, Neruda also published his lengthy epic poem Canto General, a Whitmanesque catalog of the history, geography, and flora and fauna of South America, accompanied by Neruda's observations and experiences. Many of them dealt with his time underground in Chile, which is when he composed much of the poem. In fact, he had carried the manuscript with him on his escape on horseback. A month later, a different edition of five thousand copies was boldly published in Chile by the outlawed Communist Party based on a manuscript Neruda had left behind. In Mexico, he was granted honorary Mexican citizenship. Neruda's 1952 stay in a villa owned by Italian historian Edwin Cerio on the island of Capri was fictionalized in Antonio Skarmeta's 1985 novel Ardiente Paciencia (Ardent Patience, later known as El cartero de Neruda, or Neruda's Postman), which inspired the popular film Il Postino ("The Postman", 1994).


=== Second return to ChileEdit ===

By 1952, the Gonzalez-Videla government was on its last legs, weakened by corruption scandals. The Chilean Socialist Party was in the process of nominating Salvador Allende as its candidate for the September 1952 presidential elections and was keen to have the presence of Neruda, by now Chile's most prominent left-wing literary figure, to support the campaign. Neruda returned to Chile in August of that year and rejoined Delia del Carril, who had travelled ahead of him some months earlier, but the marriage was crumbling. Del Carril eventually learned of his affair with Matilde Urrutia and he sent her back to Chile in 1955. She convinced the Chilean officials to lift his arrest allowing Urrutia and Neruda to go to Capri, Italy. Now united with Urrutia, Neruda would, aside from many foreign trips and a stint as Allende's ambassador to France from 1970 to 1973, spend the rest of his life in Chile.
By this time, Neruda enjoyed worldwide fame as a poet, and his books were being translated into virtually all the major languages of the world. He vigorously denounced the U.S. during the Cuban missile crisis and later in the decade he would likewise repeatedly condemn the U.S. for the Vietnam War. But being one of the most prestigious and outspoken left-wing intellectuals alive, he also attracted opposition from ideological opponents. The Congress for Cultural Freedom, an anti-communist organization covertly established and funded by the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency, adopted Neruda as one of its primary targets and launched a campaign to undermine his reputation, reviving the old claim he had been an accomplice in the attack on Trotsky in Mexico City in 1940. The campaign became more intense when it became known that Neruda was a candidate for the 1964 Nobel Prize, which was eventually awarded to Jean-Paul Sartre.

In 1966, Neruda was invited to attend an International PEN conference in New York City. Officially, he was barred from entering the U.S. because he was a communist, but the conference organizer, playwright Arthur Miller, eventually prevailed upon the Johnson Administration to grant Neruda a visa. Neruda gave readings to packed halls, and even recorded some poems for the Library of Congress. Miller later opined that Neruda's adherence to his communist ideals of the 1930s was a result of his protracted exclusion from "bourgeois society". Due to the presence of many Eastern Bloc writers, Mexican writer Carlos Fuentes later wrote that the PEN conference marked a "beginning of the end" of the Cold War.
Upon Neruda's return to Chile, he stopped in Peru, where he gave readings to enthusiastic crowds in Lima and Arequipa and was received by President Fernando Belaunde Terry. However, this visit also prompted an unpleasant backlash; because the Peruvian government had come out against the government of Fidel Castro in Cuba, July 1966 saw more than one hundred Cuban intellectuals retaliate against the poet by signing a letter that charged Neruda with colluding with the enemy, calling him an example of the "tepid, pro-Yankee revisionism" then prevalent in Latin America. The affair was particularly painful for Neruda because of his previous outspoken support for the Cuban revolution, and he never visited the island again, even after receiving an invitation in 1968.
After the death of Che Guevara in Bolivia in 1967, Neruda wrote several articles regretting the loss of a "great hero". At the same time, he told his friend Aida Figueroa not to cry for Che, but for Luis Emilio Recabarren, the father of the Chilean communist movement, who preached a pacifist revolution over Che's violent ways.


=== Last yearsEdit ===

In 1970, Neruda was nominated as a candidate for the Chilean presidency, but ended up giving his support to Salvador Allende, who later won the election and was inaugurated in 1970 as the first democratically elected socialist head of state. Shortly thereafter, Allende appointed Neruda the Chilean ambassador to France, lasting from 1970-1972; his final diplomatic posting. During his stint in Paris, Neruda helped to renegotiate the external debt of Chile, billions owed to European and American banks, but within months of his arrival in Paris his health began to deteriorate. Neruda returned to Chile two and half years later due to his failing health.

In 1971, Neruda was awarded the Nobel Prize, a decision that did not come easily because some of the committee members had not forgotten Neruda's past praise of Stalinist dictatorship. But his Swedish translator, Artur Lundkvist, did his best to ensure the Chilean received the prize. "A poet," Neruda stated in his Stockholm speech of acceptance of the Nobel Prize, "is at the same time a force for solidarity and for solitude." The following year Neruda was awarded the prestigious Golden Wreath Award at the Struga Poetry Evenings.
As the coup d'etat of 1973 unfolded, Neruda, then diagnosed with prostate cancer, was devastated by the mounting attacks on the Allende government. The military coup led by General Augusto Pinochet on September 11 saw Neruda's hopes for a Marxist Chile destroyed. Shortly thereafter, during a search of the house and grounds at Isla Negra by Chilean armed forces at which Neruda was present, the poet famously remarked: "Look around--there's only one thing of danger for you here--poetry." 

Neruda died of heart failure on the evening of September 23, 1973, at Santiago's Santa Maria Clinic; The funeral took place amidst a massive police presence, and mourners took advantage of the occasion to protest against the new regime, established just a couple of weeks before. Neruda's house was broken into and his papers and books taken or destroyed.
In 1974 his Memoirs appeared under the title I Confess I Have Lived, updated to the last days of the poet's life, and including a final segment describing the death of Salvador Allende during the storming of the Moneda Palace by General Pinochet and other generals - occurring only twelve days before Neruda died. Matilde Urrutia subsequently compiled and edited for publication the memoirs and possibly his final poem "Right Comrade, It's the Hour of the Garden". These and other activities brought her into conflict with Pinochet's government, which continually sought to curtail Neruda's influence on the Chilean collective consciousness. Urrutia's own memoir, My Life with Pablo Neruda, was published posthumously in 1986. Manuel Araya, his Communist Party-appointed chauffeur published a book about Neruda's final days in 2012.


=== ExhumationEdit ===
In June 2011, a Chilean judge ordered that an investigation be launched, following suggestions that Neruda had been killed by the Pinochet regime for his pro-Allende stance and political views. Neruda's driver, Manuel Araya, stated that doctors administered poison as the poet was preparing to go into exile. In December 2011 Chile's Communist Party asked Chilean Judge Mario Carroza to order the exhumation of the remains of the poet. Carroza has been conducting probes into hundreds of deaths allegedly connected to abuses of Pinochet's regime from 1973 to 1990. Carroza's inquiry during 2011-12 uncovered enough evidence to order the exhumation in April 2013. Eduardo Contreras, a Chilean lawyer, is leading the push for a full investigation. He commented: "We have world-class labs from India, Switzerland, Germany, the US, Sweden, they have all offered to do the lab work for free." The Pablo Neruda Foundation has fought the exhumation.
In June 2013 a court order was issued to find the man who allegedly poisoned Neruda. Police are investigating Michael Townley, who is facing trial for the killings of General Carlos Prats (Buenos Aires, 1974), and ex Chancellor Orlando Letelier (Washington, 1976).
Test results were released on 8 November 2013 of the seven-month investigation by a 15-member forensic team. Patricio Bustos, the head of Chile's medical legal service, stated "No relevant chemical substances have been found that could be linked to Mr. Neruda's death".


== LegacyEdit ==
Neruda owned three houses in Chile; today they are all open to the public as museums: La Chascona in Santiago, La Sebastiana in Valparaiso, and Casa de Isla Negra in Isla Negra, where he and Matilde Urrutia are buried.
A bust of Neruda stands on the grounds of the Organization of American States building in Washington, D.C.


== List of WorksEdit ==
Crepusculario. Santiago, Ediciones Claridad, 1923.
Veinte poemas de amor y una cancion desesperada. Santiago, Editorial Nascimento, 1924.
Tentativa del hombre infinito. Santiago, Editorial Nascimento, 1926.
Anillos. Santiago, Editorial Nascimento, 1926. (Prosa poetica de Pablo Neruda y Tomas Lago.)
El hondero entusiasta. Santiago, Empresa Letras, 1933.
El habitante y su esperanza. Novela. Santiago, Editorial Nascimento, 1926.
Residencia en la tierra (1925-1931). Madrid, Ediciones del Arbol, 1935.
Espana en el corazon. Himno a las glorias del pueblo en la guerra: (1936-1937). Santiago, Ediciones Ercilla, 1937.
Nuevo canto de amor a Stalingrado. Mexico, 1943.
Tercera residencia (1935-1945). Buenos Aires, Losada, 1947.
Canto general. Mexico, Talleres Graficos de la Nacion, 1950.
Los versos del capitan. 1952.
Todo el amor. Santiago, Editorial Nascimento, 1953.
Las uvas y el viento. Santiago, Editorial Nascimento, 1954.
Odas elementales. Buenos Aires, Editorial Losada, 1954.
Nuevas odas elementales. Buenos Aires, Editorial Losada, 1955.
Tercer libro de las odas. Buenos Aires, Losada, 1957.
Estravagario. Buenos Aires, Editorial Losada, 1958.
Navegaciones y regresos Buenos Aires, Editorial Losada, 1959.
Cien sonetos de amor. Santiago, Editorial Universitaria, 1959.
Cancion de gesta. La Habana, Imprenta Nacional de Cuba, 1960.
Poesias: Las piedras de Chile. Buenos Aires, Editorial Losada, 1960.Las Piedras de Pablo Neruda
Cantos ceremoniales. Buenos Aires, Losada, 1961.
Memorial de Isla Negra. Buenos Aires, Losada, 1964. 5 volumenes.
Arte de pajaros. Santiago, Ediciones Sociedad de Amigos del Arte Contemporaneo, 1966.
Fulgor y muerte de Joaquin Murieta. Santiago, Zig-Zag, 1967. La obra fue escrita con la intencion de servir de libreto para una opera de Sergio Ortega.
La Barcarola. Buenos Aires, Losada, 1967.
Las manos del dia. Buenos Aires, Losada, 1968.
Comiendo en Hungria. Editorial Lumen, Barcelona, 1969. (En co-autoria con Miguel Angel Asturias)
Fin del mundo. Santiago, Edicion de la Sociedad de Arte Contemporaneo, 1969. Con Ilustraciones de Mario Carreno, Nemesio Antunez, Pedro Millar, Maria Martner, Julio Escamez y Oswaldo Guayasamin.
Aun. Editorial Nascimento, Santiago, 1969.
Maremoto. Santiago, Sociedad de Arte Contemporaneo, 1970. Con Xilografias a color de Carin Oldfelt Hjertonsson.
La espada encendida. Buenos Aires, Losada, 1970.
Las piedras del cielo. Editorial Losada, Buenos Aires, 1970.
Discurso de Estocolmo. Alpignano, Italia, A. Tallone, 1972.
Geografia infructuosa Buenos Aires, Editorial Losada, 1972.
La rosa separada. Editions du Dragon, Paris, 1972 con grabados de Enrique Zanartu.
Incitacion al Nixonicidio y alabanza de la revolucion chilena. Santiago, Empresa Editora Nacional Quimantu, Santiago, 1973.
La Muerta


== English translations of NerudaEdit ==
Twenty Love Poems and a Song of Despair (bilingual edition) (London: Jonathan Cape, 1969 reprinted with an introduction by Christina Garcia New York: Penguin Books, 2004) (translated by W. S. Merwin)
World's End (Copper Canyon Press, 2009) (translated by William O'Daly)
The Hands of the Day (Copper Canyon Press, 2008) (translated by William O'Daly)
The Book of Questions (Copper Canyon Press, 1991, 2001) (translated by William O'Daly)
The Yellow Heart (Copper Canyon Press, 1990, 2002) (translated by William O'Daly)
Stones of the Sky (Copper Canyon Press, 1990, 2002) (translated by William O'Daly)
The Sea and the Bells (Copper Canyon Press, 1988, 2002) (translated by William O'Daly)
Winter Garden (Copper Canyon Press, 1987, 2002) (translated by James Nolan)
The Separate Rose (Copper Canyon Press, 1985) (translated by William O'Daly)
Still Another Day (Copper Canyon Press, 1984, 2005) (translated by William O'Daly)
On the Blue Shore of Silence: Poems of the Sea (Rayo Harper Collins, 2004) (translated by Alastair Reid, epilogue Antonio Skarmeta)
The Captain's Verses (bilingual edition) (New Directions, 1972) (translated by Donald D. Walsh)
100 Love Sonnets (bilingual edition) (University of Texas Press, 1986) (translated by Stephen Tapscott)
Extravagaria (bilingual edition) (Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1974) (translated by Alastair Reid)
Intimacies: Poems of Love (Harper Collins, 2008) (translated by Alastair Reid)
The Essential Neruda: Selected Poems (City Lights, 2004) (translated by Robert Hass, Jack Hirschman, Mark Eisner, Forrest Gander, Stephen Mitchell, Stephen Kessler, and John Felstiner. Preface by Lawrence Ferlinghetti)


== InfluenceEdit ==


=== MusicEdit ===
Greek composer Mikis Theodorakis set to music the Canto general.
American composer Samuel Barber used Neruda's poems for his cantata The Lovers in 1971.
Alternative rock musician Lynda Thomas released as a single the flamenco song Ay, Ay, Ay (2001), which is based on the book "Twenty Love Poems and a Song of Despair".
Austrian avant-garde composer Michael Gielen set to music Un dia sobresale (Ein Tag Tritt Hervor. Pentaphonie fur obligates Klavier, funf Soloinstrumente und funf Gruppen zu je funf Musikern mit Worten von Pablo Neruda. 1960-63).
Native American composer Ron Warren set to music Quatro Sonetos de Amor for coloratura soprano, flute and piano (1999), 1 from each group of sonnets in Cien Sonetos de Amor. Recorded on Circle All Around Me Blue Heron Music BHM101.
Mexican composer Daniel Catan wrote an opera Il Postino (2010), whose premiere production featured Spanish tenor Placido Domingo portraying Pablo Neruda.
Folk rock / progressive rock group Los Jaivas, famous in Chile, used Las alturas de Macchu Picchu as the text for their album of the same name.
Chilean composer Sergio Ortega worked closely with the poet in the musical play Fulgor y muerte de Joaquin Murieta (1967). Three decades later, Ortega expanded the piece into an opera, leaving Neruda's text intact.
Peter Lieberson composed Neruda Songs (2005) and Songs of Love and Sorrow (2010) based on Cien Sonetos de Amor.
Jazz vocalist Luciana Souza released an album called "Neruda" (2004) featuring 10 of Neruda's poems set to the music of Federico Mompou.
The South African musician Johnny Clegg drew heavily on Neruda in his early work with the band Juluka.
On the back on Jackson Browne's album The Pretender, there is a poem by Neruda.
Canadian rock group Red Rider named their 1983 LP/CD release, Neruda.
Pop band Sixpence None the Richer set his poem "Puedo escribir" to music on their platinum selling self-titled album (1997).
The group Brazilian Girls turned "Poema 15" ("Poem 15") from Veinte poemas de amor y una cancion desesperada (20 love poems and a song of despair) into their song "Me gusta cuando callas" from their self-titled album.
With permission from the Fundacion Neruda, Marco Katz composed a song cycle based on the volume Piedras del cielo for voice and piano.Centaur Records CRC 3232, 2012.
The Occitan singer Joanda composed the song Pablo Neruda 
American contemporary composer Morten Lauridsen set Neruda's poem "Soneto de la noche" to music as part of his cycle "Nocturnes" from 2005.
Juan Luis Guerra credits Neruda for two phrases for his song, "Bachata rosa".
Ezequiel Vinao composed "Sonetos de amor" (2011) a song cycle based on Neruda's love poems.
Ute Lemper composed "Forever" (2013) an album of the Love poems of Pablo Neruda


=== LiteratureEdit ===
Neruda's 1952 stay in a villa on the island of Capri was fictionalized in Chilean author Antonio Skarmeta's 1985 novel Ardiente Paciencia (published as Burning Patience, later known as El cartero de Neruda, or Neruda's Postman).
The 1998 Spanglish novel Yo-Yo Boing! by Giannina Braschi features a comic, dinner party debate between poets and artists about Neruda's genius versus that of other Spanish language poets Quevedo, Gongora, Ruben Dario, Juan Ramon Jimenez, and Federico Garcia Lorca.
In 2008 the writer Roberto Ampuero published a novel El caso Neruda, about his private eye Cayetano Brule, where Pablo Neruda is one of the protagonists.
The Dreamer (2010) is a children's fictional biography of Neruda, "a shy Chilean boy whose spirit develops and thrives despite his father's relentless negativity". Written by Pam Munoz Ryan and illustrated by Peter Sis, the text and illustrations are printed in Neruda's signature green ink.


=== FilmEdit ===
The Italian film Il Postino, inspired by Antonio Skarmeta's 1985 novel Ardiente paciencia (Ardent Patience, later known as El cartero de Neruda, or Neruda's Postman), centres on the story of Pablo Neruda (Philippe Noiret) living in exile on Salina Island near Sicily during the 1950s. While there, he befriends the local postman and inspires in him a love of poetry.
Neruda is a 120-minute documentary about his life and poetry including interviews with his friends like Volodia Teitelboim, Jose Balmes, Jorge Edwards, Andrej Wosnessenski, Mikis Theodorakis. This film was directed by the German filmmaker Ebbo Demant and broadcast 2004 in the European culture TV channel ARTE and the German public-service broadcaster ARD.


=== TelevisionEdit ===
In the U.S. sitcom How I Met Your Mother, both Ted Mosby and the Mother's favourite poem is revealed to be Pablo Neruda's Manana XXVII.


== See alsoEdit ==

Cien Sonetos de Amor


== NotesEdit ==


== SourcesEdit ==
Feinstein, Adam Pablo Neruda: A Passion for Life, Bloomsbury, 2004. ISBN 1-58234-410-8
Neruda, Pablo. Memoirs (translation of Confieso que he vivido: Memorias), translated by Hardie St. Martin, Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 1977. (1991 edition is ISBN 0-374-20660-0)
Shull, Jodie. Pablo Neruda: Passion, Poetry, Politics. Enslow. ISBN 978-0-7660-2966-8. 
Tarn, Nathaniel, Ed (1975) Pablo Neruda: Selected Poems Penguin.
Burgin, Richard (1968) Conversations with Jorge Luis Borges, Holt, Rhinehart, & Winston
Consuelo Hernandez."El Antiorientalismo en Pablo Neruda;" Voces y perspectivas en la poesia latinoamericanana del siglo XX. Madrid: Visor 2009.


== Further readingEdit ==
Translating Neruda: The Way to Macchu Picchu John Felstiner 1980
The poetry of Pablo Neruda. Costa, Rene de., 1979
Pablo Neruda: Memoirs (Confieso que he vivido: Memorias) / tr. St. Martin, Hardie., 1977


== External linksEdit ==
Profile at the Poetry Foundation
Profile at Poets.org with poems and articles
Nobel Biography
Rita Guibert (Spring 1971). "Pablo Neruda, The Art of Poetry No. 14". The Paris Review (51). 
NPR Morning Edition on Neruda's Centennial 12 July 2004 (audio 4 mins) "Pablo Neruda's 'Poems of the Sea'" 5 April 2004 (Audio, 8 mins)
"The ecstasist: Pablo Neruda and his passions." The New Yorker. 8 September 2003
Documentary-in-progress on Neruda, funded by Latino Public Broadcasting site features interviews from Isabel Allende and others, bilingual poems