Santeria, also known as Regla de Ocha or La Regla de Lucumi, is a syncretic religion of Caribbean origin which developed in the Spanish Empire among West African descendants. Santeria is influenced by and syncretized with Roman Catholicism. Its liturgical language, a dialect of Yoruba, is also known as Lucumi.


== HistoryEdit ==
Santeria is a system of beliefs that merges aspects of Yoruba mythology, which were brought to the New World by Yoruba slaves, with Christianity and Indigenous American traditions. The slaves carried with them various religious customs, including a trance and divination system for communicating with their ancestors and deities, animal sacrifice, and sacred drumming and dance.
Upon its arrival in the Americas, this religious tradition evolved into what we now recognize as Santeria.

The colonial period from the standpoint of African slaves may be defined as a time of perseverance. Their world quickly changed. Tribal kings and their families, politicians, business and community leaders all were enslaved and taken to a foreign region of the world. Religious leaders, their relatives and their followers were now slaves. Colonial laws criminalized their religion. They were forced to become baptized and worship a god their ancestors had not known who was surrounded by a pantheon of saints. The early concerns during this period seem to have necessitated a need for individual survival under harsh plantation conditions. A sense of hope was sustaining the internal essence of what today is called Santeria, a misnomer (and former pejorative) for the indigenous religion of the Lukumi people of Nigeria. In the heart of their homeland, they had a complex political and social order. They were a sedentary hoe farming cultural group with specialized labor. Their religion, based on the worship of nature, was renamed and documented by their masters. Santeria, a pejorative term that characterizes deviant Catholic forms of worshiping saints, has become a common name for the religion. The term santero(a) is used to describe a priest or priestess replacing the traditional term Olorisha as an extension of the deities. The orishas became known as the saints in image of the Catholic pantheon.

In order to preserve their traditional beliefs, the Lucumi people syncretized their Orichas with Roman Catholic Saints. Due to this history, among practitioners, the terms "saint" and "oricha" are commonly used interchangeably.
This historical "veil" characterization of the relationship between Catholic saints and Orichas is made all the more complicated by the fact that the vast majority of santeros in Cuba, Puerto Rico, and the Dominican Republic, are also Roman Catholics, have been baptized, and often require initiates to be baptized in Roman Catholicism as well.
In 1974, the Church of the Lukumi Babalu Aye became the first Santeria church in the United States to become officially incorporated.


== Rituals and ceremoniesEdit ==
Santeria does not use a central creed for its religious practices; though it is understood in terms of its rituals and ceremonies. These rituals and ceremonies take place in what is known as a house-temple or casa de santos (house of saints), also known as an ile. Most iles are in the homes of the initiated Priests and Priestesses. Ile shrines are built, by the priests and priestess, to the different orichas which creates a space for worship, called an igbodu (altar). In an igbodu there is a display of three distinct thrones (draped with royal blue, white, and red satin) that represent the seats of the queens, kings, and the deified warriors.
Each ile is composed of those who occasionally seek guidance from the orishas, as well as those who are in the process of becoming priests.
The many cabildos and casas that bridged the 19th and 20th centuries are fondly remembered by contemporary priests as the origins and strongholds of Cuban Lucumi culture and religion.
To become a Santero or Santera (Priest or Priestess of Santeria), the initiator must go through an intensive week-long initiation process in which the teaching of the ritual skills and moral behavior occurs informally and nonverbally. To begin with, the initiator goes through what is called a cleansing ritual. The initiator's Padrino (godfather) cleanses the head with special herbs and water. The Padrino rubs the herbs and water in a specific pattern of movements into the scalp of the head. However, if a person is entering Santeria for the need of healing, they will undergo the rogacion de la cabeza (blessing of the head), in which coconut water and cotton are applied on the head to feed it. Once cleansed, there are four major initiation rituals that the initiator will have to undergo, which are: obtaining the elekes (beaded necklace), receiving Los Guerreros (the Warriors), and making Ocha (Saint).


=== Obtaining the elekesEdit ===
The first ritual is known as the acquisition of the beaded necklaces (known as elekes); according to De La Torre, "the colors and patterns of the beads on the elekes will be those of the oricha that serves as the iyawo's (bride) ruling head and guardian angel and so the first thing that must be done is to determine who the oricha is. The elekes necklace is bathed in a mixture of herbs, sacrificial blood, and other potent substances and given to the initiated.
The initiate most often receives the necklace of the five most powerful and popular oricha, as the multicolored beads of the elekes are each patterned for the primary Orichas (Elegua, Obatala, Yemaya, Chango, and Ochun), and they serve as a sacred point of contact with these Orichas. When the necklace is received, the initiated must bow over a bathtub and have his/her head washed by the olo oricha. The elekes serves as the sacred banners for the Orichas and act as a sign of the Oricha's presence and protection; however, it must never be worn during a woman's menstruation period, nor during sex, nor when bathing.


=== Medio AsientoEdit ===
The second important ritual is known as medio asiento, the creation of an image of the oricha Elegua. The individual will go through a consultation with a Santero, where all the recipients' life, past, present, and future, will be reviewed. During the consultation, the Santero determines which path of Elegua the recipient will receive. Then, based on his findings, he chooses materials that will be used to construct the image of the Elegua, a sculpture that is used to keep evil spirits away from the initiator's home. This ritual is only prepared by men as the orichas take some of the Santero's "manly" spirit in the process.


=== Los GuerrerosEdit ===
The third ritual, known as "receiving the warriors", is a ritual where the initiated receives objects from their padrino that represents the warriors; Iron tools to represent Ogun; an iron bow and arrow to represent Ochosi; and an iron or silver chalice surmounted by a rooster to represent Osun. This ritual begins a formal and lifelong relationship that the initiate will have with these Orichas, as the orichas devote their energies to protecting and providing for the initiate on their path.


=== AsientoEdit ===
The last ritual of the initiation process is known as Asiento (ascending the throne), and is the most important and the most secretive ritual in Santeria, as it is the ceremony where the iyawo (bride of the oricha) becomes "born again" into the faith. This ritual is a culmination of the previous rituals, and cannot be made unless the others have been completed. Asiento is a process of purification and divination whereby the initiated becomes like a newborn baby and begins a new life of deeper growth within the faith.


=== Post-initiationEdit ===
Once the initiation is completed, depending on the individuals "house", there is a year-long waiting period, known as iyaboraje, in which the newly appointed Priest and Priestess can not perform cleansings and other remedies. It is a time where the Iyawo or Bride of the Oricha must follow a strict regimen of wearing all white and must avoid physical contact with those who have not been initiated. Once the ebo del ano has been completed there will be an end of year ceremony, which will enable the Priest or Priestess to consult clients, perform cleansings, provide remedies and perform initiations. And according to Gonzalez: "they are also regarded as royalty in the religion, as they are considered representatives of the Orichas and are vested with the power to work with the forces of those Orichas in full."
With Santeria rituals there are musical ceremonies and prayers which are referred to as bembe, toque de santo, or tambor. It is a celebration dedicated to an Oricha, where the bata drums (set of three drums known as the iya (the largest drum), itoltele, and okonkolo) are played in the Oricha's honor. Through these sacred drums, messages of worshippers reach the orichas and the orichas respond to their devotees. These drums are used only by men and must always be treated with respect; for example, dancers must never turn their backs towards the drums while dancing, as it is considered disrespectful.


=== ClergyEdit ===
Priests are commonly known as Santeros or Olorichas. Once those priests have initiated other priests, they become known as babalorichas, "fathers of oricha" (for men), and as iyalorichas, "mothers of oricha" (for women). Priests can commonly be referred to as Santeros (male) and Santeras (female), and if they function as diviners (using cowrie-shell divination known as Dilogun) of the Orichas they can be considered Italeros, or if they go through training to become leaders of initiations, Obas or Oriates.


== Lucumi traditional healing practicesEdit ==
Lucumi traditional healing practices are rooted in the spiritual influences of America, Europe, and West Africa. Having a strong spiritual component, these traditional healing practices also use the pathways of the herbalist, psychologist, ethicist, and that of a respected spiritual medium interceding between God and human beings. Du Toit refers to Cuban traditional healing practices as ethnomedicine which taps on the biodynamic chemical properties of certain plants, from which some commercial drugs were derived, such as the cardiac medications, digitalis, quinine, and curare - chemicals causing neuromuscular paralysis. Du Toit categorizes Cuban ethnomedicine as having health specialists which are: el yerbero (the herbalist), el curandero (the curer), el santero (the religious healer), and el conocedor (the botanist). Du Toit continues, "Cuba is one of the regions in which a great deal of ethnographic and ethnobotanical research has been conducted."
Du Toit cites the studies of Lydia Cabrera on the religious and healing role of indigenous medicinal plants, and Jose Gallo on the 900-page compilation of folk medicine, and also mentions that with the 31 herbs prescribed as bronchodilators, only Datura candida was effective, due to its contents of scopolamine and atropine in the leaves. Lemongrass or cana de limon is used for low blood pressure and anti-inflammatory effects. Thyme tea and castor oil are used to speed the delivery of babies and the broomweed (Corchorus siliquosus) induces the quick expulsion of the placenta. Herbs are also used to create a trance possession using the hallucinogenic properties of Datura metel and Datura stramonium (both have scopolamine and atropine, causing amnesia), the psychoactive ingredients from the cane toad (Bufo marinus).
Aside from being herbalist, Santeria traditional healing practice has a spiritual aspect. Santeria has a holistic approach, acknowledging the connection with heart, mind, and body. In Santeria, the world flows with the primal life energy called ache or growth, the force toward completeness and divinity. Ache is the current that Santeria initiates channel so that it empowers them to fulfill their path in life, because ache is connected to all that has life or exhibits power; ache comprises blood, grace, and power. When a person is sick, the healer thinks, interprets and reacts, considering the illness not just a physical dysfunction but also an interface with suffering and bad luck in life, believed to be brought on by the activity of bad spirits.
Prevalent in Caribbean cultures, espiritismo is a part of the Latin American traditional healing practice. Du Tout reveals that Santeria has a "strong element of spiritism." McNeill also concurs that some Santeros have the power to communicate with spirits asking for guidance to improve the situation of a person consulting. However, in general, the Santeros of the Regla de Ocha primarily turn to religion as their practice to address personal challenges and identify means to improve a situation. Many people may go and see espirititas who don't see a Santero. Also, espiritistas may work hand in hand with Santeros.
While psychotherapy uses allopathic principles, spiritism uses homeopathic principles which aim to reduce the anxiety, or permit the patient to acknowledge pent-up emotions, unexpressed guilt, or repressed behavior through catharsis meant to release emotions the patient may not even be aware of. It is said that "healing can occur when the spirit medium assists the sufferer to come into harmony with the spirit world so as to change his or her physical condition, emotions, way of life, or destiny."
The reputation of espiritistas was tinged with negativity, being accused of witchcraft because they deal with health through the unfamiliar paradigm of the spirit world, which was not understood by either the medical doctors or the Catholic priests. Consequently, espiritistas or traditional healers of Santeria and other Latin American cultures working with healing through the spirit world are attacked as "works of the devil" from the pulpits of the Catholic Churches and labeled as "quackery" from the journals of the medical profession. This unique system of knowledge is appreciated as ethnopharmacology or ethnomedicine.
Aligning and harmonizing with the forces of nature, practitioners of the Regla de Ocha invoke on the guidance of Orichas. There are three foremost orichas that are predominantly concerned with folk-healing, however, other orichas may be invoked to help a person with a specific problem. These main orichas are: Osain, the oricha of the herbs; Babalu-Aye, the oricha of contagious and epidemic diseases; and Inle, the patron of physicians. Osain is the patron of curanderos or traditional herbal healers, also called Osainistas. According to de la Torre, Osain is believed to be embodied in the omiero which is a combination of "blood from sacrifices offered during the ceremony and juices extracted from herbs that are sacred to the Orichas with water (from rain, rivers, or seas) honey, aguardiente, powdered eggshell, corojo, and cocoa butter." The forest has everything that would maintain a robust health and keep a person away from malevolence, thus, Santeria practitioners would agree that no spell will be able to work without the sanction of Osain, the master herbalist commanding the healing secrets of plant life. Osain is syncretized with Saint Joseph, Saint Benito, or Saint Jerome. Babalu-Aye is revered by its victims and survivors like smallpox, leprosy, and skin diseases. Babalu-Aye has become the guardian of those with HIV/AIDS. He is syncretized with Saint Lazarus. Inle is the patron of physicians, known as a healer who favors scientific methods. Inle is ranked as one of the orichas that is approached for very specific health issues. Thus, Inle is also known as the protector of homosexuals and feminosexuals.
People go to a consulta for many reasons, mainly for health related issues. Divination is a means that traditional healers utilize to inquire further on the details of a problem. Divination may articulate the origin/cause of the problem; in addition, it may include prescriptions for solutions/suggestions to certain difficulties. Divination establishes an interpretative frame for the situation a person finds himself in. Hence, the Santeros offer cowrie-shell divination or other appropriate traditional practices. Rituals, or the reading of patakis may be done to clarify a problem which sometimes the person consulting may not even be aware of. Passed orally from many generations, pataki are parables used by diviners to guide or give insights or moral lessons to a person who came for consultation. The pataki recited by the Santero corresponds to the number that the cowrie shell divination brings.
Aside from the use of herbs and divination, the Santeria traditional healing is achieved through rituals that include animal sacrifice, offerings, altar building, music, dance, and possession trance. When the patient is a child, the Santero uses the curative system known as santiguo which means "to heal by blessing". Perceiving some health problems, most Santeros recommend that the client seeks a medical doctor for a check-up. Parallel to the medical treatment, the patient might be prescribed some herbal teas, cleansing baths, or a special diet from the traditional healing practice. Sometimes, a Santero might advise a client to receive omiero, whose efficacy, people unfamiliar with the paradigm of traditional healing practice, would be considered as "magical herbal elixir" and thus, conjectured as resulting to "miracle cures." An omiero is a sacred mixture that is made up for very specific Santeria ceremonies and is believed to embody the oricha ruler of herbs, Osain. Most clients who see Santeros would never be told to drink it.
Santeria traditional healing is just one of the many traditional healing practices used in Caribbean and Latin American cultures. Being so attuned to the natural world, these traditional healers bring this sensitivity to assist in the holistic improvement of a patient. Owing to the unique form of transculturation, traditional healing practices are practiced side by side with allopathic medicine through the progressive, universal Cuban healthcare system. Cuban healthcare integrates the biopsychosocial model which is geared towards preventive and community-oriented psychology, with the general health philosophy of the country. Traditional healers recognize but do not compete with Western medicine. Modern Western medicine may treat physical ailments, but the traditional healing systems deal with emotional, mental, and spiritual issues.


== Current distributionEdit ==
Santeria is mainly found in the Americas (notably the Caribbean), including but not limited to Cuba, Puerto Rico, Dominican Republic, Panama, Colombia, Venezuela, and the United States, mainly as a result of immigration from these countries, especially Cuba and Puerto Rico.
In 2001, there were an estimated 22,000 practitioners in the US alone, but the number may be higher as some practitioners may be reluctant to disclose their religion on a government census or to an academic researcher. Of those living in the United States, some are fully committed priests and priestesses, others are godchildren or members of a particular house-tradition, and many are non-committal clients seeking help with their everyday problems.
A similar religion of Yoruba origin called Candomble Queto is practiced in Brazil, Argentina, and Uruguay. This is referred to as "parallel religiosity".


== ControversyEdit ==
In 1993, the issue of animal sacrifice in Santeria was taken to the Supreme Court of the United States in the case of Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye v. City of Hialeah. The court ruled that animal cruelty laws targeted specifically at Santeria were unconstitutional.
In 2009, legal and religious issues that related to animal sacrifice, animal rights, and freedom of religion were taken to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit in the case of Jose Merced, President Templo Yoruba Omo Orisha Texas, Inc., v. City of Euless. The court ruled that the Merced case of the freedom of exercise of religion was meritorious and prevailing and that Merced was entitled under the Texas Religious Freedom and Restoration Act (TRFRA) to an injunction preventing the city of Euless, Texas, from enforcing its ordinances restricting his religious practices relating to the use of animals, (see Tex. Civ. Prac. & Rem. Code SS 110.005(a)(2)) without the court having to reach his claims under the First and Fourteenth Amendments. After the court case was settled, a news article was published in the Dallas Observer documenting the volume and brutality of the animal sacrifices.


== Popular cultureEdit ==
Stephen Hunter's novel, Havana
The documentary film, Alabba (2010)
Other films and television series, e.g., Sex and the City 1998 episode: "Oh Come All Ye Faithful"
"Santeria," a song by the band Sublime, features the name of the religion in its opening line.
TV series, Orange Is the New Black.
The novel Perdita Durango.
For a partial list of film and TV references, see IMDb - search plot - Santeria


== See alsoEdit ==
Candomble Queto
Ifa


== ReferencesEdit ==


== Further readingEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
Library resources in your library and in other libraries about Santeria
[1]
About Santeria
OrishaNet An informational site on Santeria
Furius Santeria DB, A database of the rhythms and chants found in recordings
Joseph M Murphy. "Santeria". Encyclopaedia Britannica.