Simon Bolivar (IPA: [si'mon bo'libar]), in full Simon Jose Antonio de la Santisima Trinidad Bolivar y Palacios (24 July 1783 - 17 December 1830), was a Venezuelan military and political leader who played an instrumental role in the establishment of Venezuela, Ecuador, Bolivia, Peru and Colombia as personal fiefdoms independent of Spanish rule.
Bolivar was born into a wealthy, aristocratic Creole family, and similar to others of his day, he was educated in Europe at a young age, arriving in Spain at the age of 16. There, he was introduced to the thoughts and ideas of learned Enlightenment philosophers, which inspired him with the ambition to replace the Spanish as rulers. Taking advantage of the disorder in Spain prompted by the Peninsular War, Bolivar inaugurated his campaign for independence in 1808, and within three years an organized national congress had been established. Despite a number of hindrances, including the arrival of an unprecedentedly large Spanish expeditionary force, the revolutionaries eventually prevailed, culminating in a patriot victory at the Battle of Carabobo in 1821, which effectively made Venezuela his.
Following this triumph over the Spanish monarchy, Bolivar participated in the foundation of the first union of independent nations in Latin America, Gran Colombia, of which he was president from 1819 to 1830. Through further military conquest, he also conquered Ecuador, Peru, and finally, Bolivia (which was named after him), assuming the presidency of each of these new nations. At the peak of his power, Bolivar ruled over a vast territory from the Argentine border to the Caribbean.
Modern-day historians consider Bolivar to be a deeply polarizing individual, with criticism aimed especially at his belief that a strong presidency, maintained for life, is essential to a state's survival. Nevertheless, many Latin Americans laud him as a meritorious liberator, whose revolutionary ideas and reforms continue to leave a lasting legacy today.


== Family history ==
The surname Bolivar derives from the Bolivar aristocrats who came from a small village in the Basque Country, Spain, called La Puebla de Bolivar. His father came from the male line of the Ardanza family. His maternal grandmother was descended from families from the Canary Islands that settled in the country.
The Bolivars settled in Venezuela in the sixteenth century. His first South American Bolivar ancestor was Simon de Bolivar (or Simon de Bolibar; the spelling was not standardized until the nineteenth century), who went to live and work with the governor of Santo Domingo from 1550 to 1570. When the governor of Santo Domingo was reassigned to Venezuela by the Spanish Crown in 1589, Simon de Bolivar came back with him. As an early settler in Caracas Province, he became prominent in the local society and he and his descendants were granted estates, encomiendas, and positions in the Caracas cabildo.
The social position of the family is illustrated by the fact that when the Caracas Cathedral was built in 1594, the Bolivar family had one of the first dedicated side chapels. The majority of the wealth of Simon de Bolivar's descendants came from the estates. The most important of these estates was a sugar plantation with an encomienda that provided the labor needed to run the estate. Another portion of Bolivar wealth came from the silver, gold, and more importantly, copper mines in Venezuela. In 1632, small gold deposits first were mined in Venezuela, leading to further discoveries of much more extensive copper deposits. From his mother's side, the Palacios family, Bolivar inherited the copper mines at Cocorote. Native American and African slaves provided the majority of the labor in these mines.
Toward the end of the seventeenth century, copper exploitation became so prominent in Venezuela that it became known as Cobre Caracas ("Caracas copper"). Many of the mines became the property of the Bolivar family. Bolivar's grandfather, Juan de Bolivar y Martinez de Villegas, paid 22,000 ducats to the monastery at Santa Maria de Montserrat in 1728 for a title of nobility that had been granted by the king, Philip V of Spain, for its maintenance. The crown never issued the patent of nobility, and so the purchase became the subject of lawsuits that were still going on during Bolivar's lifetime, when independence from Spain made the point moot. (If successful, Bolivar's older brother, Juan Vicente, would have become the Marques de San Luis and Vizconde de Cocorote.) Bolivar gave away his personal fortune to the revolution.


== Early life ==

Simon Bolivar was born in a house in Caracas, Captaincy General of Venezuela (now the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela), on 24 July 1783. Bolivar was baptized as Simon Jose Antonio de la Santisima Trinidad Bolivar y Palacios. His mother was Dona Maria de la Concepcion Palacios y Blanco and his father was Coronel Don Juan Vicente Bolivar y Ponte. He had two older sisters and a brother: Maria Antonia, Juana, and Juan Vicente. Another sister, Maria del Carmen, died at birth.
Bolivar's parents found themselves in a circumstance that forced them to entrust the baby Simon Bolivar to the care of Dona Ines Manceba de Miyares and the family's slave la negra Hipolita. A couple of years later Bolivar returned to the love and care of his parents, but this traumatic experience would have a severe effect on Bolivar's life. Before his third birthday, his father Juan Vicente had died.

Bolivar's father died in his sleep when Bolivar was two and a half years old. Bolivar's mother, Maria Concepcion de Palacios y Blanco, died when he was approaching nine years of age. He then was placed in the custody of a severe instructor, Miguel Jose Sanz, but this relationship did not work out and he was sent back to his home. In an effort to give Bolivar the best education possible, he received private lessons from the renowned professors Andres Bello, Guillermo Pelgron, Jose Antonio Negrete, Fernando Vides, Father Andujar, and the most influential of all, Don Simon Rodriguez, formerly known as Simon Carreno. Don Simon Rodriguez was later to become Bolivar's friend and mentor, and he instilled in the young man the ideas of liberty, enlightenment, and freedom.
In the meantime, he was mostly cared for by his nurse, a black slave woman named Hipolita, whom he later called "the only mother I have known." His instructor Don Simon understood the young Bolivar's personality and inclinations, and tried from the very beginning to be an empathetic friend. They took long walks through the countryside and climbed mountains. Don Simon taught Bolivar how to swim and ride horses, and, in the process, taught him about liberty, human rights, politics, history, and sociology.


=== Military career ===
When Bolivar was fourteen, his private instructor and mentor Simon Rodriguez had to abandon the country, as he was accused of being involved in a conspiracy against the Spanish government in Caracas. Thus, Bolivar entered the military academy of the Milicias de Veraguas, which his father had sought out as colonel years earlier. Through these years of military training, he developed his fervent passion for armaments, liberty, and military strategy, which he later would employ on the battlefields of the wars of independence. A few years later, while in Paris, Bolivar witnessed the coronation of Napoleon in Notre Dame, and this majestic event left a profound impression upon him. From that moment he wished that he could emulate similar triumphant glory for the people of his native land.


== El Libertador ==

Bolivar returned to Venezuela in 1807. After the coup on 19 April 1810, Venezuela achieved de facto independence when the Supreme Junta of Caracas was established and the colonial administrators deposed. The Junta sent a delegation to Great Britain to get British recognition and aid. This delegation, which included Simon Bolivar and future Venezuelan notables Andres Bello and Luis Lopez Mendez, met with and persuaded Francisco de Miranda to return to his native land. In 1811 a delegation from the Supreme Junta, among them Bolivar, and a crowd of common people enthusiastically received Miranda in La Guaira. During civil war conducted by Miranda, Bolivar was promoted to colonel and made commandant of Puerto Cabello the following year in 1812. At the same time that royalist Frigate Captain Domingo de Monteverde was making fast and vast advances into republican territory from the west, Bolivar lost control of San Felipe Fort along with its ammunition stores on 30 June 1812. Deciding that the situation was lost, Bolivar effectively abandoned his post and retreated to his estate in San Mateo. Miranda also saw the republican cause as lost and signed in San Mateo town a capitulation with Monteverde on 25 July. Then Colonel Bolivar and other revolutionary officers claimed his actions as treasonous. In one of Bolivar's most morally dubious acts, Bolivar and others arrested and handed Miranda over to the Spanish Royal Army in La Guaira port. For his apparent services to the royalist cause, Monteverde granted Bolivar a passport, and Bolivar left for Curacao on 27 August. In 1813 he was given a military command in Tunja, New Granada (modern day Colombia), under the direction of the Congress of United Provinces of New Granada, which had formed out of the juntas established in 1810.

This was the beginning of the famous Admirable Campaign. He entered Merida on 24 May, where he was proclaimed as El Libertador (The Liberator). That event was followed by the occupation of Trujillo on 9 June. Six days later, on 15 June, he dictated his famous Decree of War to the Death, allowing the killing of any Spaniard not actively supporting independence. Caracas was retaken on 6 August 1813 and Bolivar was ratified as "El Libertador", thus proclaiming the restoration of the Venezuelan republic. Due to the rebellion of Jose Tomas Boves in 1814 and the fall of the republic, he returned to New Granada, where he then commanded a force for the United Provinces and entered Bogota in 1814, recapturing the city from the dissenting republican forces of Cundinamarca. He intended to march into Cartagena and enlist the aid of local forces in order to capture Royalist Santa Marta. In 1815, after a number of political and military disputes with the government of Cartagena, however, Bolivar fled to Jamaica, where he was denied support and an attempt was made on his life, after which he fled to Haiti, where he was granted sanctuary and protection. He befriended Alexandre Petion, the leader of the newly independent country, and petitioned him for aid.

In 1816, with Haitian soldiers and vital material support, Bolivar landed in Venezuela and fulfilled his promise to Alexandre Petion to free Spanish America's slaves on 2 June 1816. In January 1817, on a second expedition, Bolivar captured Angostura in July (now Ciudad Bolivar), after defeating the counter-attack of Miguel de la Torre. However, Venezuela remained a captaincy of Spain after the victory in 1818 by Pablo Morillo in the second battle of La Puerta. Yet, Bolivar was able to open the Second National Congress in Angostura on 15 Feb. 1819, in which Bolivar was elected president and Francisco Antonio Zea vice president. Bolivar then decided that he would first fight for the independence of New Granada, to gain resources of the vice royalty, intending later to consolidate the independence of Venezuela.
The campaign for the independence of New Granada was consolidated with the victory at the Battle of Boyaca on 7 Aug. 1819. Bolivar returned to Angostura, where congress passed a law forming the Republic of Greater Colombia on 17 Dec., making Bolivar president and Zea vice president, with Santander vice president on the New Granada side, and Juan German Roscio vice president on the Venezuela side. Morillo was left in control of Caracas and the coastal highlands. After the restoration of the Cadiz Constitution, Morillo ratified two treaties with Bolivar on 25 Nov. 1820, calling for a six-month armistice and recognizing Bolivar as president of the republic. Bolivar and Morilla met in San Fernando de Apure on 27 Nov., after which Morilla left Venezuela for Spain, leaving La Torre in command.
From his newly consolidated base of power, Bolivar launched outright independence campaigns in Venezuela and Ecuador, and these campaigns were concluded with the victory at the Battle of Carabobo, after which he triumphantly entered Caracas on 29 June 1821. On 7 September 1821 the Gran Colombia (a state covering much of modern Colombia, Panama, Venezuela, Ecuador, northern Peru, and northwest of Brazil) was created, with Bolivar as president and Francisco de Paula Santander as vice president. Bolivar followed with the Battle of Bombona and the Battle of Pichincha, after which Bolivar entered Quito on 16 June 1822.
On 26 and 27 July 1822, Bolivar held the Guayaquil Conference with the Argentinian General Jose de San Martin, who had received the title of Protector of Peruvian Freedom in August 1821 after having partially liberated Peru from the Spanish. Thereafter, Bolivar took over the task of fully liberating Peru. The Peruvian congress named him dictator of Peru on 10 February 1824, which allowed Bolivar to reorganize completely the political and military administration. Assisted by Antonio Jose de Sucre, Bolivar decisively defeated the Spanish cavalry at the Battle of Junin on 6 August 1824. Sucre destroyed the still numerically superior remnants of the Spanish forces at Ayacucho on 9 December 1824.
On 6 August 1825, at the Congress of Upper Peru, the "Republic of Bolivia" was created, and voted Bolivar president. Bolivar is thus one of the few men to have a country named after him.
Bolivar returned to Caracas on 12 Jan. 1827, but returned to Bogota on 10 Sept. 1827 to assume absolute power, setting the date of the constituent congress, 2 Jan. 1830, as the day he would surrender power.


== Proclamation of presidency ==

Bolivar had great difficulties maintaining control of the vast Gran Colombia. In 1826, internal divisions had sparked dissent throughout the nation, and regional uprisings erupted in Venezuela. The new South American union had revealed its fragility and appeared to be on the verge of collapse. To preserve the union, an amnesty was declared and an arrangement was reached with the Venezuelan rebels, but this increased the political dissent in neighboring New Granada. In an attempt to keep the nation together as a single entity, Bolivar called for a constitutional convention at Ocana in March 1828.
Bolivar's dream was freedom for all races in the Americas, but felt the federation found in the US was unworkable. For this reason, and to prevent a break-up, Bolivar sought to implement a more centralist model of government in Gran Colombia, including some or all of the elements of the Bolivian constitution he had written, which included a lifetime presidency with the ability to select a successor (although theoretically, this presidency was held in check by an intricate system of balances). This move was considered controversial in New Granada and was one of the reasons for the deliberations, which met from 9 April to 10 June 1828. The convention almost ended up drafting a document which would have implemented a radically federalist form of government, which would have greatly reduced the powers of a central administration. The federalist faction was able to command a majority for the draft of a new constitution which has definite federal characteristics despite its ostensibly centralist outline. Unhappy with what would be the ensuing result, pro-Bolivar delegates withdrew from the convention, leaving it moribund.
Two months after the failure of this congress to write a new constitution, Bolivar was declared president-liberator in Colombia's "Organic Decree". He considered this as a temporary measure, as a means to reestablish his authority and save the republic, although it increased dissatisfaction and anger among his political opponents. An assassination attempt on 25 September 1828 failed, thanks to the help of his lover, Manuela Saenz. Bolivar afterward described Manuela as "Liberatrix of the Liberator". Although Bolivar emerged safely from the attempt, this nevertheless greatly affected him. Dissent continued, and uprisings occurred in New Granada, Venezuela, and Ecuador during the next two years. Finally, Bolivar recommended the republic be divided into three separate states: Venezuela, Colombia, and Ecuador, and he would depart after the constitutional congress in Jan. 1830.


== Death ==

Saying, "All who served the Revolution have plowed the sea", Bolivar finally resigned his presidency on 27 April 1830, intending to leave the country for exile in Europe. He already had sent several crates (containing his belongings and writings, which he had selected) ahead of him to Europe, but he died before setting sail from Cartagena.
On 17 December 1830, at the age of 47, Simon Bolivar died of tuberculosis in the Quinta de San Pedro Alejandrino in Santa Marta, Gran Colombia (now Colombia). On his deathbed, Bolivar asked his aide-de-camp, General Daniel F. O'Leary to burn the remaining, extensive archive of his writings, letters, and speeches. O'Leary disobeyed the order and his writings survived, providing historians with a wealth of information about Bolivar's liberal philosophy and thought, as well as details of his personal life, such as his long love affair with Manuela Saenz. Shortly before her own death in 1856, Saenz augmented this collection by giving O'Leary her own letters from Bolivar.

His remains were buried in the cathedral of Santa Marta. Twelve years later, in 1842, at the request of President Jose Antonio Paez, they were moved from Santa Marta to Caracas, where a monument was set up for his interment in the National Pantheon of Venezuela. The 'Quinta' near Santa Marta has been preserved as a museum with numerous references to his life. In 2010, symbolic remains of Bolivar's lover, Manuela Saenz, were interred by his side during a national ceremony reuniting them and honoring her role in the liberations.
On January 2008, then President of Venezuela Hugo Chavez set up a commission to investigate theories that Bolivar was the victim of an assassination. On several occasions, Chavez has claimed that Bolivar was in fact poisoned by "New Granada traitors". In April 2010, infectious diseases specialist Paul Auwaerter studied records of Bolivar's symptoms and concluded that he might have suffered from chronic arsenic poisoning, but that both acute poisoning and murder were unlikely. In July 2010, Bolivar's body was ordered to be exhumed to advance the investigations. In July 2011, international forensics experts released their report claiming that there was no proof of poisoning or other unnatural cause of death.


== Private life ==

In 1799, following the early deaths of his father Juan Vicente (died 1786) and his mother Concepcion (died 1792), he traveled to Mexico, France, and Spain, at the age of sixteen years, to complete his education. While in Madrid during 1802 and after a two-year courtship, he married Maria Teresa Rodriguez del Toro y Alaiza, who was his only wife. She was related to the aristocratic families of the Marques del Toro of Caracas and the Marques de Inicio of Madrid. Eight months after returning to Venezuela with him, she died from yellow fever. Devastated by his sudden loss and after having sworn never to marry again Bolivar returned to Europe in 1804 where interest in politics became the best medicine against his acute depression. Not surprisingly many years later Bolivar would refer to the death of his wife as the turning point of his life. He lived in Napoleonic France for a while and undertook the Grand Tour. During this time in Europe, Bolivar met Alexander von Humboldt in Rome, Humboldt later writing, "I was wrong back then, when I judged him a puerile man, incapable of realizing so grand an ambition." Manuela Saenz was his mistress in later life during his presidency in South America.


== Descriptions of Bolivar ==


=== Ducoudray Holstein's description of Bolivar ===
In his Memoirs of Simon Bolivar, Henri La Fayette Villaume Ducoudray Holstein - who himself has been called a "not-always-reliable and never impartial witness" ) - described the young Bolivar as he was attempting to seize power in Venezuela and Bolivia in 1814-1816 .
Ducoudray Holstein joined Bolivar and served on his staff as officer and Bolivar's confident during this period. He describes Bolivar as a coward who repeatedly abandoned his military commission in front of enemy, and also as also a great lover of women, being accompanied at all times by 2 or more of his mistresses during the military operations. He would not hesitate to stop the fleet transporting the whole army and bound for Margarita Island during 2 days in order to wait for his mistress to join his ship.
According to Ducoudray Holstein Bolivar behaved essentially as an opportunist preferring intrigues and secret manipulation to open fight. He was also incompetent in military matters, systematically avoiding any risks and permanently anxious for his own safety.
In Diario de Bucaramanga, a publication by the Ministry of Popular Power for Communication and Information, Bolivar's opinion of Ducoudray is presented when Louis Peru de Lacroix asked who had been Bolivar's aides-de-camp since he had been general, he mentioned Charles Eloi Demarquet and Ducoudray; Bolivar confirmed the first but denied the second, saying that he had met him in 1815 and accepted his services, even admitting him to his General Staff, but "I never trusted him enough to make him my aide de camp; to the contrary I had a very unfavorable idea of his person and his services", and that Ducoudray only stayed briefly with him and that his departure had been a "real pleasure".


=== Karl Marx's description of Bolivar ===

In an unsympathetic biography titled Bolivar y Ponte, Simon published in the New American Cyclopedia, Karl Marx criticized much of Bolivar's life. Marx begins saying that Bolivar was born to a family of "creole nobility in Venezuela" and that similar to the "custom of wealthy Americans of those times, at the early age of 14 he was sent to Europe". Throughout Marx's piece, he explains how Bolivar abandoned his troops multiple times as well. Marx also explains how Bolivar had to be persuaded by his cousin Ribas to return to fight against the Spanish after staying at Cartagena. Marx then explains that after arriving in Caracas in 1813, Bolivar's "dictatorship soon proved a military anarchy, leaving the most important affairs in the hands of favorites, who squandered the finances of the country, and then resorted to odious means in order to restore them". At the conclusion of the biography, Marx uses Ducoudray Holstein's description of Bolivar.
According to Beddow and Thibodeaux, Marx called Bolivar a "[f]alsifier, deserter, conspirator, liar, coward, and looter" stating that Marx dismissed Bolivar as a "false liberator who merely sought to preserve the power of the old Creole nobility which he belonged".


== Relatives ==
Bolivar had no children, possibly because of infertility caused by having contracted measles and mumps as a child. His closest living relatives descend from his sisters and brother. One of his sisters died in infancy. His sister Juana Bolivar y Palacios married their maternal uncle, Dionisio Palacios y Blanco, and had two children, Guillermo and Benigna. Guillermo Palacios died fighting alongside his uncle Simon in the battle of La Hogaza on 2 December 1817. Benigna had two marriages, the first to Pedro Briceno Mendez and the second to Pedro Amestoy. Their great-grandchildren, Bolivar's closest living relatives, Pedro, and Eduardo Mendoza Goiticoa lived in Caracas, as of 2009. The family still lives in Caracas today.
His eldest sister, Maria Antonia, married Pablo Clemente Francia and had four children: Josefa, Anacleto, Valentina, and Pablo. Maria Antonia became Bolivar's agent to deal with his properties while he served as president of Gran Colombia and she was an executrix of his will. She retired to Bolivar's estate in Macarao, which she inherited from him.
His older brother, Juan Vicente, who died in 1811 on a diplomatic mission to the United States, had three children born out of wedlock whom he recognized: Juan, Fernando Simon, and Felicia Bolivar Tinoco. Bolivar provided for the children and their mother after his brother's death. Bolivar was especially close to Fernando and in 1822 sent him to study in the United States, where he attended the University of Virginia. In his long life, Fernando had minor participation in some of the major political events of Venezuelan history and also traveled and lived extensively throughout Europe. He had three children, Benjamin Bolivar Gauthier, Santiago Hernandez Bolivar, and Claudio Bolivar Taraja. Fernando died in 1898 at the age of 88.


== Political beliefs ==
Simon Bolivar was an admirer of both the American and the French Revolutions. Bolivar even enrolled his nephew, Fernando Bolivar, in a private school in Philadelphia, Germantown Academy, and paid for his education, including attendance at Thomas Jefferson' University of Virginia. Bolivar differed, however, in political philosophy from the leaders of the revolution in the United States on two important matters. First of all, he was staunchly anti-slavery, despite coming from an area of Spanish America, that relied heavily on slave labor. Second, while he was an admirer of the American independence, he did not believe that its governmental system could function in Latin America. Thus, he claimed that the governance of heterogeneous societies like Venezuela "will require an infinitely firm hand."
Bolivar felt that the US had been established in land especially fertile for democracy. By contrast, he referred to Spanish America as having been subject to the "triple yoke of ignorance, tyranny, and vice." If a republic could be established in such a land, in his mind, it would have to make some concessions in terms of liberty. This is shown when Bolivar blamed the fall of the first republic on his subordinates trying to imitate "some ethereal republic" and in the process, not paying attention to the gritty political reality of South America.
Among the books accompanying him as he traveled were, Adam Smith's The Wealth of Nations, Voltaire's Letters, and when he was writing the Bolivian Constitution, Montesquieu's Spirit of the Laws. His Bolivian constitution placed him within the camp of what would become Latin American conservatism in the later nineteenth century. The Bolivian Constitution intended to establish a lifelong presidency and a hereditary senate, essentially recreating the British unwritten constitution, as it existed at the time, without formally establishing a monarchy. It was his attempts to implement a similar constitution in Gran Colombia that led to his downfall and rejection by 1830.


== Freemasonry ==
Similarly to some others in the history of American Independence (George Washington, Miguel Hidalgo, Jose de San Martin, Bernardo O'Higgins and Francisco Miranda), Simon Bolivar was a Freemason. He was initiated in 1803 in the Masonic Lodge Lautaro which operated in Cadiz, Spain. It was in this lodge that he first met some of his revolutionary peers, such as Jose de San Martin. In May 1806 he was conferred the rank of Master Mason in the "Scottish Mother of St. Alexander of Scotland" in Paris. During his time in London, he frequented "The Great American Reunion" lodge in London, founded by Francisco de Miranda. In April 1824, Simon Bolivar was given the 33rd degree of Inspector General Honorary.


== Legacy ==


=== Political legacy ===
Due the historical relevance of Bolivar as a key element during the process of independence in Hispanic America, his memory has been strongly attached to sentiments of nationalism and patriotism, being a recurrent theme of rhetoric in politics, especially in Venzuela. For instance, the nationalist government led by Marcos Perez Jimenez and the left-wing political movement led by Hugo Chavez in Venezuela both prominently utilize the memory, image, and written legacy of Bolivar an important part of their political messages and propaganda. Since the image of Bolivar became an important part to the national identities of Venezuela, Colombia, Panama, Ecuador, Peru, and Bolivia, his mantle is often claimed by Hispanic American politicians all across the political spectrum.


=== Monuments and physical legacy ===
The nations of Bolivia and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (Venezuela), and their respective currencies (the Bolivian boliviano and the Venezuelan bolivar) are all named after Bolivar. Additionally, most cities and towns in Venezuela are built around a main square known as Plaza Bolivar, as is the case with Bogota. In this example, most governmental buildings and public structures are located on or around the plaza, including the National Capitol and the Palace of Justice. Busts and statues in his memory can be found around the world, including in the capital cities of Quito, Lima, Washington, D.C., Algiers, Paris, Ottawa, London, Bucharest, Havana, Ankara, Prague, New Delhi, Port-au-Prince, Santo Domingo, and Sucre.
In Bogota, the Simon Bolivar Park has hosted many concerts.
Outside of Latin America, the variety of monuments to Simon Bolivar are a continuing testament to his legacy. Many cities in Spain, especially in the Basque Country have constructed monuments to Bolivar, including a large monument in Bilbao and a comprehensive Venezuelan government-funded museum in Bolivar, his ancestral hometown. An imposing bronze equestrian statue of Simon Bolivar at the entrance to Central Park at the Avenue of the Americas in New York also celebrates Bolivar's contributions to Latin America.
Monuments to Bolivar's military legacy also comprise one of Venezuelan Navy's sail training barques, which is named after him, and the USS Simon Bolivar (SSBN-641), a Benjamin Franklin-class fleet ballistic missile submarine which served with the U.S. Navy between 1965 and 1995.


== See also ==

Brigadier General Antonio Valero de Bernabe
Bolivarian Revolution
General Louis Peru de Lacroix, a biographer of Bolivar who served as one of his generals
Gabriel Garcia Marquez's novel The General in His Labyrinth (1989), a fictionalized account of Bolivar's last days
National Pantheon of Venezuela
Toussaint Louverture
Miguel Hidalgo
Alexandre Petion
Francisco de Miranda


== Explanatory notes ==


== References ==

Cited sources


== Further reading ==
Arana, Marie. Bolivar: American Liberator. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2013.
Reza, German de la. "La invencion de la paz. De la republica cristiana del duque de Sully a la sociedad de naciones de Simon Bolivar", Mexico, Siglo XXI Editores, 2009. ISBN 978-607-03-0054-7
Bushnell, David. The Liberator, Simon Bolivar. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1970.
Bushnell, David (ed.) and Fornoff, Fred (tr.), El Libertador: Writings of Simon Bolivar, Oxford University Press, 2003. ISBN 978-0-19-514481-9
Bushnell, David and Macaulay, Neill. The Emergence of Latin America in the Nineteenth Century (Second edition). Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1994. ISBN 978-0-19-508402-3
Ducoudray Holstein, H.L.V. Memoirs of Simon Bolivar. Boston: Goodrich, 1829.
Harvey, Robert. "Liberators: Latin America's Struggle For Independence, 1810-1830". John Murray, London (2000). ISBN 978-0-7195-5566-4
Higgins, James (editor). The Emancipation of Peru: British Eyewitness Accounts, 2014. Online at https://sites.google.com/site/jhemanperu
Lynch, John. Simon Bolivar and the Age of Revolution. London: University of London Institute of Latin American Studies, 1983. ISBN 978-0-901145-54-3
Ludwig, Emil. "Bolivar: The Life of an Idealist," Alliance Book Corporation, New York, 1942.
Lynch, John. The Spanish American Revolutions, 1808-1826 (Second edition). New York: W. W. Norton & Co., 1986. ISBN 978-0-393-95537-8
Madariaga, Salvador de. Bolivar. Westport: Greenwood Press, 1952. ISBN 978-0-313-22029-6
Marx, Karl. "Bolivar y Ponte" in The New American Cyclopaedia: A Popular Dictionary of General Knowledge, Vol. III. New York: D. Appleton & Co., 1858.
Mijares, Augusto. The Liberator. Caracas: North American Association of Venezuela, 1983.
O'Leary, Daniel Florencio. Bolivar and the War of Independence/Memorias del General Daniel Florencio O'Leary: Narracion (Abridged version). Austin: University of Texas, [1888] 1970. ISBN 978-0-292-70047-5
Bastardo-Salcedo,JL (1993) Historia Fundamental de Venezuela UVC,Caracas.


== External links ==
Simon Bolivar on In Our Time at the BBC. (listen now)
The Life of Simon Bolivar
The Louverture Project: Simon Bolivar - Information about the support Bolivar received from Haiti.
In Profile: Simon Bolivar - The Liberator
About the surname Bolibar/Bolivar, in Spanish
Paternal ancestors of the Liberator, in Spanish
Coats of arms of the Bolibars, in Spanish
Maternal ancestors of the Liberator (Palacios family), in Spanish
(Spanish) Glrbv.org: Biography
Beside Bolivar: The Edecan Demarquet - About C. E. Demarquet, one of Bolivar's principal aides
"Building a New History by Exhuming Bolivar" Simon Romero, The New York Times, 3 August 2010
"Bolivar: American Liberator" on YouTube Lecture by Marie Arana, The John W. Kluge Center, The Library of Congress, 6 June 2013
Simon Bolivar at Find a Grave