In Jainism, a Tirthankara is a person who has conquered samsara (the cycle of death and rebirth), and provide a bridge for others to follow them from samsara to moksha (liberation). Tirthankara literally means a "ford-maker" and refers to a jina (hero) who builds a ford across across the ocean of rebirth and transmigration for others to use. According to Jain Agamas, that which helps one to cross samsara is a tirtha ("ford") and the rare individual who refounds Jainism is a tirthankara ("ford-maker"). Tirthankara also organise sangha, a fourfold order of male and female monastics, sravaka (male followers) and sravaika (female followers).
Twenty-four tirthankaras grace each half of the cosmic time cycle in Jain cosmology. The 24th tirthankara of the current cycle was Mahavira, who was a contemporary of Gautama Buddha.


== Overview ==

The tirthankaras' teachings form the basis for the Jain canons. The inner knowledge of tirthankara is believed to be perfect and identical in every respect and their teachings do not contradict one another. However, the degree of elaboration varies according to the spiritual advancement and purity of the society during their period of leadership. The higher the spiritual advancement and purity of mind of the society, the lower the elaboration required.
While tirthankaras are documented and revered by Jains, their grace is said to be available to all living beings, regardless of religious orientation.
Tirthankaras are Arihants who after attaining Kevala Jnana (pure infinite knowledge) preach the true dharma. An Arihant is also called Jina (victor), that is one who has conquered inner enemies such as anger, attachment, pride and greed. They dwell exclusively within the realm of their Soul, and are entirely free of kashayas, inner passions, and personal desires. As a result of this, unlimited siddhis, or spiritual powers, are readily available to them - which they use exclusively for the spiritual elevation of living beings. Through darsana, divine vision, and deshna, divine speech, they help others in attaining kevalajnana, and moksha (final liberation) to anyone seeking it sincerely.
Tirthankara images are usually seated with their legs crossed in front, the toes of one foot resting close upon the knee of the other, and the right hand lying over the left in the lap.


== Five life events (Panch Kalyanak) ==

Life of tirthankaras are marked with the following five auspicious events (Kalyanaka)-
Garbh Kalyanaka (conception): When soul of a Tirthankara comes into his mother's womb.
Janma Kalyanaka (birth): Birth of Tirthankara. Indra does an Abhisheka on the Tirthankara on Mount Meru.
Diksha Kalyanaka (renunciation): When Tirthankara renounce all worldly possessions and become an ascetic.
Gyan Kalyanaka: The event when a tirthankara attains Keval Gyan (infinite knowledge). Samavasarana (divine preaching hall) is erected from where he delivers sermons and restores sangha after that.
Nirvana Kalyanaka (liberation): When a tirthankara leaves his mortal body, it is known as Nirvana. It is followed by the final liberation, moksha. Their souls dwells in Siddhashila after that.


== Samavasarana ==

After attaining Kevala Jnana, tirthankara preach path to liberation in a heavenly pavilion, known as Samavasarana. According to Jain texts, the heavenly pavilion is erected by devas (heavenly beings) where devas, humans and animals assemble to hear the tirthankara. Tirthankara speech is intercepted by all humans and animals in their own language. It is believed that during this speech, there is no unhappiness for miles around the site.


== Tirthankaras of present cosmic age ==
Jainism postulates that time has no beginning or end. It moves like the wheel of a cart. Jains believe that exactly twenty-four tirthankaras are born in each half-cycle of time in this part of the universe. The first tirthankara was Rishabha, who is credited for formulating and organising humans to live in a society harmoniously. The 24th and last tirthankara was Mahavira (599-527 BC).
In Jain tradition the tirthankaras were royal in their final lives, and Jain texts record details of their previous lives. Their clan and families are also among those recorded in very early, or legendary, Hindu history. Twenty two tirthankaras belonged to the Ikshvaku dynasty. Two tirthankaras Munisuvrata, the twentieth, and Neminatha, the twenty-second, belonged to the Hari dynasty. Jain canons state that Rishabha, the first tirthankara, founded the Ikshvaku dynasty.
Twenty tirthankaras achieved "siddha" status on mount Shikharji. Rishabha attained nirvana on Mount Kailash, Vasupujya at Champapuri in North Bengal, Neminatha on mount Girnar in Gujarat, and Mahavira, the last tirthankara, at Pawapuri, near modern Patna. Twenty-one of the tirthankaras are said to have attained moksha in the kayotsarga "standing meditation" posture, while Rishabha, Neminatha and Mahavira are said to have attained moksha in the lotus position.


== List of the 24 tirthankaras ==


=== Present cosmic age ===

In chronological order, the names, emblems and colours of the 24 tirthankaras of this age are mentioned below: 1 dhanusa (bow) is equal to 6 ft and 4 hatha is equal to 1 dhanusa.


=== Next cosmic age ===
As per Jain cosmology, the wheel of time is divided in two halves, Utsarpini or ascending time cycle and Avasarpini, the descending time cycle. 24 tirthankaras are born in each half of this cycle. The 24 tirthankaras of the present age (avasarpini) are the ones listed above. The names of the next 24, which will be born in utsarpini age are as follows. [Mentioned in the parentheses is one of the (previous human birth) of that soul.]
Padmanabh (King Shrenik)
Surdev (Mahavir's uncle Suparshva)
Suparshva (King Kaunik's son king Udayi)
Svamprabh (The ascetic Pottil)
Sarvanubhuti (Sravaka Dridhayadha)
Devshruti (Kartik's shreshti)
Udaynath (Shravak Shamkha)
Pedhalputra (Shravak Anand)
Pottil (Shravak Sunand)
Shatak (Sharavak Shatak)
Munivrat (Krishna's mother Devaki)
Amam (Lord Krishna)
Shrinishkashay (Satyaki Rudhra)
Nishpulak (Krishna's brother Balbhadra also known as Balrama)
Nirmam (Shravika Sulsa)
Chitragupt (Krishna's brother's mother Rohini)
Samadhinath (Revati Gathapatni)
Samvarnath (Sharavak Shattilak)
Yashodhar (Rishi Dwipayan)
Vijay (Karna of Mahabharata)
Malyadev (Nirgranthaputra or Mallanarada)
Devachandra (Shravak Ambadh)
Anantvirya (Shravak Amar)
Shribhadrakar (Shanak)


== Gallery ==


== See also ==

Mythological data of Tirthankara
God in Jainism
Tattva (Jainism)
Simandhar Swami
Kundakunda


== Notes ==


== References ==
Pramansagar, Muni (2008), jain tattvavidya, India: Bhartiya Gyanpeeth, ISBN 978-81-263-1480-5 
Balcerowicz, Piotr (2009), Jainism and the definition of religion (1st ed.), Mumbai: Hindi Granth Karyalay, ISBN 978-81-887-69292 
Sangave, Vilas Adinath (2001), Aspects of Jaina religion (3 ed.), New Delhi: Bharatiya Jnanpith, ISBN 81-263-0626-2 
Jain, Vijay K. (2015), Acarya Samantabhadra's Svayambhustotra: Adoration of The Twenty-four Tirthankara, Vikalp Printers, ISBN 9788190363976, archived from the original on 2015, Non-Copyright